OPD – 10.1
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Daily Reports
Weekly Reports
Bi-Weekly Reports
Monthly Reports
Quarterly Reports
Annual Reports
Incident Reports
Accountability of Department Forms
ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTING
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to define the several types of reports used by
Department personnel to establish an efficient and accurate flow of information within
the Department. These reports provide essential information to Department personnel in
accomplishing the goals and objectives of the Department.
II. POLICY:
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to establish an efficient and accurate
flow of information within the Department. This is accomplished using various
administrative reports prepared on a daily, weekly, monthly, annually, or per incident
basis.
III. DAILY REPORTS:
A. These reports provide management and employees with timely information necessary
to decision making and the daily operation of the Department.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 2 of 7
B. Daily Log
This report is generated by the computer aided dispatch system and details all calls for
service and reports. These reports can be accessed in real time.
C. Daily Roster
This report is completed by each shift to document the duty hours, assignment, vehicle,
and equipment (i.e. TASER, body armor, etc.) for all Patrol, Detectives and
Administrative Officers.
D. PremierOne Reporting Service
All officers will use this computer program to document all calls-for service, arrests,
crimes, or other incidents and information that all personnel should be made aware.
Officers are responsible for reading this log at the beginning of their shift or as soon as
possible after relieving the previous shift. The on-coming shift commander will pass on
this notable activity to patrol or investigative personnel.
IV. BI-WEEKLY REPORTS:
A. Payroll Report
The Deputy Chief of Police prepares payroll bi-weekly. The payroll report is forwarded
to the Finance Department.
B. Compensatory Time Report
The Deputy Chief of Police generates a summary report on compensatory time earned,
used and accumulated. This is submitted with the payroll report.
V. WEEKLY REPORTS:
A. Facility Inspection Report
The Sunday night shift commander is responsible for ensuring the weekly inspection of
the police facility to ensure cleanliness. The inspections also include operable mechanical
systems, operable safety systems, and building security. The reports are filed with the
Bureau of Support Services.
B. Holdover Area Inspection Report
The Sunday night shift commander is responsible for ensuring the weekly inspection of
the holdover area to ensure cleanliness, security, and supplies. The reports are filed with
the Bureau of Support Services.

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 3 of 7
C. Vehicle Inspection Report
The Sunday night shift commander is responsible for ensuring the weekly inspection of
all patrol vehicles under his/her command for conditions and operations of vehicle
equipment and supplies. These reports are forwarded to the Bureau of Support Services.
VI. MONTHLY REPORTS:
A. These reports provide summaries of activities by components of the Department.
B. Uniform Crime Report
The Commander of the Bureau of Investigations will submit the UCR to the FBI and
Missouri State Highway Patrol. These reports are generated using the CARE computer
system and include data on the occurrence of reported crimes.
C. Criminal Investigation Report/Crime Analysis
This report is prepared by the Bureau of Investigation. The report includes a summary of
the monthly activity of the BOI including juvenile offenses. This report is submitted to
the Chief of Police.
E. Status of Emergency Preparedness Equipment
The assigned officer will submit to the Chief of Police a quarterly report on the status of
equipment necessary to handling unusual occurrences. This report ensures the readiness
of the Department in the event of an emergency.
VII. ANNUAL REPORTS:
A. These reports are used to summarize the activities and actions of the Department,
assess achievement of our goals and objectives, identify training needs, and to plan future
programs.
B. Department Report
This report is prepared by the Chief of Police. The report includes material submitted by
each bureau and summarizes the overall operations of the Department during the past
year. This report is distributed to the Mayor and City Council and is available to the
general public upon request.
C. Response to Resistance or Aggression Report
This report is prepared each year by the Deputy Chief and is submitted to the Chief of
Police. This report summarizes response to resistance or aggression incidents during the

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 4 of 7
previous year and is used to identify patterns of abuse and/or the need for additional
training in the proper response to resistance or aggression.
D. Employee Conduct Report
This report is prepared by the Bureau of Support Services Commander and is submitted
to the Chief of Police. This report summarizes allegations of misconduct made against
Department employees and is used to identify patterns of misconduct and/or the need for
additional training.
E. Summary of Employee Grievances
The Chief of Police will prepare a summary report of employee grievances, if any. This
report is used to identify problems within the Department which may be corrected by
addressing the causes of the grievances.
F. Pursuit Report
The Bureau of Support Services Commander will submit to the Chief of Police an annual
report on police pursuits initiated by the Department. This report is used to identify
compliance with the Department’s pursuit policy.
G. Training Report
To ensure proper training and the professionalism of the Department, the Deputy Chief
will submit to the Chief of Police an annual report of the Department’s training. The
report will include a summary of P.O.S.T. continuing education for each officer,
summary of in-service training conducted by the Department, and any other issues
relevant to the training function.
H. Goals and Objectives
The Bureau Commanders will meet annually with the Chief of Police to review the goals,
objectives, functions, and specialized assignments within their respective bureaus and the
Department overall. The review will be used to generate updated goals and objectives
that will be disseminated to all employees of the Department.
I. Audit of Department Computer System
The Deputy Chief will ensure that all password and security precautions for the
Department computer systems and REJIS computer systems are audited annually. Any
discrepancies found during the audit will be forwarded to the Chief of Police.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 5 of 7
J. Audit of Evidence Room
The Chief of Police will direct a person not routinely or directly connected with the
control of property or evidence to conduct an audit of the evidence room, involving a
random sampling of evidence. This annual audit ensures the proper storage of evidence
and the integrity and security of the evidence process. A memo detailing the results of
the audit will be submitted to the Chief of Police.
VIII. INCIDENT REPORTS:
A. These reports are prepared each time a specific incident occurs and are used to
determine compliance with policy and procedure, review of policy and procedure, and
effective planning for future events and incidents. These reports are prepared and
submitted in accordance with related policy and procedure.
B. Pursuit Memorandum
This is prepared by the immediate supervisor of the officer(s) involved in a pursuit. The
investigation and memo are to ensure compliance with policy and procedure on pursuits.
The memorandum is forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.
C. Employee Conduct Review Form (Form #OPD – F1015)
This is prepared by the supervisor or commander taking the complaint of alleged
misconduct. The form is the initiation of the investigation into the complaint and, upon
completion of the investigation, will be forwarded to the Chief of Police.
D. Escape of Prisoner Memorandum
This is prepared by the immediate supervisor of the officer(s) involved in the
transportation of a prisoner who escapes from custody. The investigation and
memorandum are to ensure compliance with policy and procedure on the handling of
prisoners. The memorandum will be forwarded through the chain of command to the
Chief of Police.
E. Incident Report for Insurance Carrier
Supervisors will ensure that this form is completed within twenty-four (24) hours
whenever there is potential liability on the part of the City. The form is forwarded to the
City Manager through the Chief of Police.
F. Supervisor’s Investigation Report for Worker’s Compensation Incidents
The immediate supervisor of any officer(s) or employee(s) injured on duty will
immediately prepare an investigative report on the injury. The report, with any related
police reports, will be forwarded to the City Manager through the Chief of Police.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 6 of 7
G. Memorandums
Additional reports or information not otherwise defined herein may be reported in the
form of a memorandum generally addressed to the Chief of Police and submitted through
the chain of command. Information contained in the memorandum will be transmitted to
the appropriate function.
H. Traffic Stop/Field Contact Quarterly Review
The Bureau of Support Services Commander will review quarterly data for all officer’s
traffic stop contacts and logged field contacts. Officers who are 40% or more above the
Department average of combined total contacts of any given race during any quarter will
receive a review of (5) randomly chosen traffic stop contacts and/or field contacts. A
determination will be made whether there were any evident bias-based policing decisions
and/or policy violations made. The result of the review will be forwarded through the
chain of command to the Chief of Police.
IX. ACCOUNTABILITY OF DEPARTMENT FORMS:
A. The Bureau of Support Services Commander is responsible for the development and
modification of Department forms.
1. Department personnel may submit suggestions for new forms or revisions to
current forms through the chain of command to Bureau of Support Services. The
Commander may design or modify a Department form.
2. The Chief of Police will review Department forms submitted by Bureau of
Support Services Commander, as necessary. Existing forms will be reviewed
annually to determine their necessity.
3. Final approval of Department forms will be made by the Chief of Police.
B. The Bureau of Support Services Commander is responsible for the maintenance of
Department forms. A master index of Department forms will be kept in the office of the
Bureau of Support Services.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/30/2009

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD – 10.1
Page 7 of 7
Revised: 10/4/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 2/22/2018
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 8/17/2020
Revised: 10/12/2020
Revised: 5/28/2021
Revised: 12/21/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 9/9/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

