OPD - 12.1
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Employee Performance Evaluations
Scheduled Performance Evaluations
Evaluation Coaching Session
Appeals of Evaluation Reports
Rater Evaluations
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
I. PURPOSE:
It is the mission of the Olivette Police Department to provide the highest quality law
enforcement services to the citizens we serve. Our mission necessitates that we
recognize, encourage, and develop in our members those attributes which promote the
professional completion of our mission.
To assist us in meeting the high standards to which we subscribe, we have adopted a
performance evaluation system. This system was not designed simply to sanction poor
performers, but to recognize and reward the many members of the Department who excel
at the work they do. This evaluation system has been designed to provide a means by
which the Department can document and gauge its performance while simultaneously
providing employees with a means to develop themselves professionally.
For the performance evaluation system to work its best, it needs to provide as accurate a
gauge of the employee’s performance as possible. Supervisors should therefore strictly
adhere to the following guidelines when evaluating their employees.
The evaluation system is designed to be used Department-wide, and the rating factors
listed are believed to be important qualities of performance in all Department personnel
regardless of assignment. Supervisors should recognize, however, that each assignment
is different, carrying different responsibilities and tasks. Employees should be rated on
each factor as it relates to their assignment during the rating period.
Supervisors should try to avoid the several types of bias that can occur with rating
systems. One type of bias occurs when an employee performs very poorly or very well

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 12.1
Page 2 of 5
on one factor and the supervisor rates them similarly on all other factors as well. This
common error can be avoided by attempting to consider each individual factor
independent of the others. It is quite possible for an employee to perform very well on
one factor while only performing adequately on others. Another type of bias occurs
when an employee is rated solely on performance during one particularly recent period or
one recent incident. This can be avoided by being certain to consider the employee’s
behavior over the entire rating period. Supervisors should also be certain not to allow
personal likes or dislikes to affect their rating ability. Employees should be rated only on
their performance and not on their personality.
II. EVALUTORS:
A. Performance evaluations will be conducted by the employee’s commander with
additional relevant comments by other immediate supervisors. The Chief of Police must
sign off on all performance evaluations.
B. All supervisors will receive training in performance evaluations as a component of
basic supervision training provided through the Missouri State Highway Patrol Law
Enforcement Academy, the St. Louis County and Municipal Police Academy, or other
P.O.S.T. approved provider.
III. SCHEDULED PERFOMANCE EVALUATIONS:
A. Probationary employees are evaluated by their direct supervisor monthly, until the
end of their probationary period.
B. After the initial probationary period, employees are evaluated annually by their
commander.
IV. DOCUMENTATION OF PERFORMANCE:
A. Coaching Report – Form #OPD – F1058
1. The purpose of the Coaching Report is to assist supervisors in continually
monitoring, evaluating, and appraising employees of their performance. In
addition, the record will provide the supervisor and employee with material upon
which to reflect when preparing the Performance Evaluation Form. The Coaching
Report may be used to assist the evaluator during the current evaluation period.
Other records of behavior may be used in addition to the Coaching Report. The
Coaching Report will be uploaded by the administering supervisor and maintained
in Guardian Tracking as a confidential document.
2. At any time, the supervisor feels that any aspect of an employee’s performance
is unsatisfactory, the supervisor will document the incident on the Coaching
Report. This documentation will be made on the date of the occurrence or as soon
after as possible.

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 12.1
Page 3 of 5
3. In cases of unsatisfactory performance, the supervisor will counsel the
employee in private about the incident and should explore and indicate ways in
which the employee may correct the behavior. After discussion, both the
supervisor and the employee will sign the Coaching Report acknowledging the
conversation.
4. Whenever possible, counseling for unsatisfactory performance will be made
prior to ninety (90) days before the next scheduled evaluation of the employee.
This will allow the employee the opportunity to correct their behavior. This
provision does not preclude a supervisor from counseling an employee on
unsatisfactory behavior when counseling becomes necessary during the ninety
(90) days prior to the evaluation.
5. In cases of superior performance, the supervisor may choose to compliment the
employee in private or in the presence of the work unit. After discussion of the
incident, the supervisor should document the compliment and create a record of
the superior performance in Guardian Tracking.
6. Prior to the employee’s scheduled evaluation, the Coaching Report and any
superior performance documentation may be reviewed by the employee’s
supervisor. The employee’s supervisor may refer to the documents when
completing the Performance Evaluation Form.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:
Officers are rated by their commander on the Performance Evaluation Form. The patrol
commander and bureau commander will use and sign the Evaluation Comment section to
appraise and comment on the officer’s performance. The completed original
Performance Evaluation Form will be forwarded to the Deputy Chief, Chief of Police and
filed in accordance with applicable procedure and law.
Each rating area contains descriptions used to describe levels of performance and is
weighted to reflect a certain percentage of the overall rating score. These descriptions are
not all inclusive but are intended to serve as characteristics and examples of the
employee’s performance. For each rating area, the employee can be rated on a scale of
one (1) through five (5), where 5 is the highest score available. Most employees will
most likely be rated three (3) for most rating areas. An area that is rated other than three
(3) means that the employee is recognized as being better or worse than the average
officer in that rating area and requires explanatory comments in that rating area. While
the following list is not exhaustive, rating areas may include:
• OPERATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES
• ORGANIZATIONAL FUNCTIONS
• MANAGEMENT OF STAFF
• COMMUNITY OUTREACH AND

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 12.1
Page 4 of 5
• COMMUNICATION
VI. EVALUATION COUNSELING SESSION:
A. Once the evaluation is complete, it should be discussed with the employee by the
employee’s commander. Without this exchange of information, the evaluation cannot
serve as the development tool it was meant to be. The evaluation counseling session
should be structured freely, and the employee should be urged to discuss anything they
wish. At a minimum, however, the following four (4) areas should be discussed:
1. Tasks of the position occupied.
2. The level of performance expected.
3. The evaluation rating criteria; and
4. The expectations of the employee for the next rating period.
B. The officer will be given the opportunity to make written comments to supplement the
completed performance evaluation.
C. The employee should sign and date the evaluation form in the space provided. The
commander should explain to the employee that his/her signature does not indicate
agreement with the rating, but only acknowledgment of the counseling session. The
employee will be provided with a copy of the completed performance evaluation.
VII. APPEALS OF EVALUATION REPORTS:
After discussing the evaluation with the rater, should the officer or employee not agree
with the rater’s appraisal, the following procedures shall be used to appeal the evaluation:
1. The employee may submit, within ten (10) days following the conference with
the commander, a written statement, which shall be attached to the Performance
Evaluation Form and forwarded through the Chief of Police to the City Manager.
VIII. RATER EVALUATIONS:
Command and supervisory personnel should note that the evaluation of their
subordinate’s performance is one of their key supervisory responsibilities. Command
Staff will evaluate raters regarding their fairness and impartiality of ratings given, their
participation in counseling rated employees, and their ability to carry out the rater’s role
in the performance evaluation system. Command Staff will ensure that the raters apply
ratings uniformly.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 12.1
Page 5 of 5
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 11/16/2009
Revised: 8/27/2013
Revised: 4/7/2014
Revised: 7/13/2016
Revised: 2/24/2020
Revised: 1/15/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 2/18/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

