OPD - 12.3
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Evaluation
Performance Management
Personnel Early Warning System
PERSONNEL PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT
I. PURPOSE
A. A comprehensive Personnel Performance Management System is an essential
component of a well-managed law enforcement agency. The Department is committed to
recognizing employee performance deserving of merit and identifying and addressing
employee performance deficiencies. The early identification of potential problem
employees and a menu of remedial actions not only increase the Agency’s level of
accountability, but also offers employees a better opportunity to understand and comply
with the Department’s values and mission.
B. This policy is intended to assist supervisors and commanders in identifying
employees whose performance warrants review and, where appropriate, provide
intervention in circumstances that may have negative consequences for the employee,
fellow employees, this Agency, and/or the general public. This intervention is intended
to assist employees who exhibit signs of performance and/or stress related problems and
prevent allegations of misconduct or disciplinary action.
C. The system is also intended to be used to recognize employees whose actions reflect
favorably on themselves, the Department and the City.
II. POLICY
A. It is the policy of this Department to provide a method for monitoring and reviewing
specific performance behaviors of Department personnel through a Personnel
Performance Management System called Guardian Tracking. Guardian Tracking shall be
a means to identify and assess an employee’s performance, both positive and negative,
and intervene where appropriate.
B. The availability of the system does not diminish the responsibility of supervisors to
monitor daily the performance and behavior of employees nor does it alleviate them of

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 12.3
Page 2 of 6
the responsibility to report any infractions of the law, City Personnel Manual, or
Department General Orders to their supervisor.
III. DEFINITIONS
Action Item: Guardian Tracking application feature which allows employees and
supervisors to create a task for follow up.
Intervention/Merit Review: a predetermined number of entries that trigger a
supervisor’s review of the officer/employee’s record for appropriate action.
Performance File: entries into Guardian Tracking regarding Department personnel.
IV. GENERAL
A. Guardian Tracking will assist supervisors in streamlining employee documentation
and evaluation. Additionally, it will create entries that are readily available to
Department personnel and easily transferred between supervisors. Entries into an
employee’s Performance File may aid supervisors in completing annual performance
evaluations.
B. The system IS NOT a substitute for face-to-face, supervisor to subordinate,
discussions.
C. Department personnel are required to log into the Guardian Tracking system and
review their Performance File at least monthly to ensure accuracy of entries. When an
employee receives notification from Guardian Tracking informing him/her of an entry in
their Performance File, he/she is required to log into the system during their next shift to
review the entry.
D. Supervisors are required to log into the Guardian Tracking system at least weekly to
review the Performance Files of their subordinate personnel, make entries into the system
and complete any action items.
V. PROCEDURE
Entries into Guardian Tracking must be made under one of the incident categories
established within the system. The incident categories are created by the Chief of Police.
Categories may be added or removed at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The
Guardian Tracking system will monitor the number of incidents entered for any given
employee.
A. Merit-Based Entries – The purpose of Merit-Based entries is to recognize any
employee who has gone above and beyond expected performance.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 12.3
Page 3 of 6
1. Merit-Based Categories – Merit-Based entries will be made within one of the
following categories which will carry 1 point per entry:
a. Outstanding Performance
b. Demonstrated Leadership
c. Teamwork
d. Initiative
e. Award Nomination or Presentation
2. Recognition - When a member of the Department accumulates a total of four
points in Merit-Based categories within a rolling six-month period, the
Recognition tab will be displayed in red and an email will be sent to that
employee’s hierarchy of supervisors. This tab will not be seen by the employee.
The employee’s immediate supervisor will notify the employee and make an entry
into the system acknowledging the tab. Points accumulated towards a
Recognition flag will not be reused towards triggering another Recognition
occurrence within the same six-month period.
B. Performance Concern Entries – The purpose of Performance Concern entries is to
recognize as early as possible potential performance issues.
1. Performance Concern Categories – Performance Concern entries will be made
within one of the following categories which will carry 1 point per entry unless
otherwise noted below:
a. Allegations of Misconduct (both internal and citizen complaints)
b. Response to Resistance or Aggression Reports
c. Pursuit Reports
d. Traffic Accidents involving City-owned vehicles
e. Bias Based Policing
f. Non-Scheduled Absenteeism - Patterns showing abuse of sick leave,
tardiness for scheduled duty or off-duty details or absent without leave
from a duty assignment or off-duty detail
g. Workplace Safety - Accidental discharge of any weapon, preventable
accidents (non-crash), unsafe act, failure to use good judgment in safety
matters, etc.)

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 12.3
Page 4 of 6
h. Damage to Property - City-owned or belonging to a third party
i. Appearance, Uniforms and/or Equipment
2. The following Performance Concern Categories will carry a weighted threshold
to trigger an early intervention alert:
a. Policy Violation – 2 points
b. Traffic Accident City Vehicle – 2 points
c. Use of Force HFFEK – 2 points
d. Use of Force Taser Used – 2 points
e. Vehicular Pursuit – 2 points
f. Failure to Appear – 3 points
g. Use of Force Firearm Used – 4 points
3. Early Intervention - When a member of the Department accumulates a total of
four points in Performance Concern categories within a rolling six-month period,
the Early Intervention tab will be displayed in red and an email will be sent to that
employee’s hierarchy of supervisors. This tab will not be seen by the employee.
Points accumulated towards an Early Intervention flag will be reused towards
triggering another Early Intervention occurrence within the same six-month
period.
C. ENTRY and RESPONSE PROCEDURES
1. Documentation: When available, documentation to support an entry into an
employee’s Performance File should be uploaded and attached to the event. (i.e.
“Recognition” category may have a citizen’s letter for attachment).
2. Responding to Early Intervention Flags
a. Before creating a response to an Early Intervention flag, the immediate
supervisor shall review the employee’s past entries and inform the
employee’s Patrol Commander and the Deputy Chief of an explanation as
to why the performance and/or behavior does not require corrective action,
or recommend further action be taken.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 12.3
Page 5 of 6
b. If no further corrective action is required then the immediate supervisor
shall open the “Early Intervention” tab, click “Post Response” and make
an appropriate entry.
c. If further action is recommended on an Early Intervention Flag, the
Commander of the Bureau of Support Services shall complete Form
#OPD-1167 “Personnel Early Warning Notice” and submit it to the
involved employee’s immediate supervisor for comments. The form will
then be forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.
The Deputy Chief shall establish a meeting date to discuss the report and
other relevant information. Attendees of the meeting will be the Chief of
Police, Deputy Chief, Commander of the Bureau of Support Services, the
employee’s Patrol Commander, immediate supervisor of the employee, the
Human Resources Director and the employee. After the meeting, a
response shall be made in the Guardian Tracking system by the
employee’s immediate supervisor.
d. The results of the meeting shall be used to determine what corrective
action and/or further training will be taken. Per the City’s Employee
Handbook, in certain instances, the City will use a progressive disciplinary
system. The City is not obligated to use all of the progressive disciplinary
steps available and may begin the disciplinary process at any level, up to
and including immediate discharge, depending upon the severity of the
conduct, the employee’s prior work performance and disciplinary history,
the employee’s length of service, and any mitigating or other relevant
circumstances. Depending on the circumstances of each individual case,
disciplinary action may consist of one or more of the following:
i. Counseling Session
ii. Documented Oral Warning
iii. Written Reprimand
iv. Suspension Without Pay
v. Demotion
vi. Discharge
VI. REVIEW AND EVALUATION
A. The Commander of the Bureau of Support Services shall forward through the chain of
command to the Chief of Police an annual review and evaluation of Guardian Tracking.
The report shall detail:

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 12.3
Page 6 of 6
1. The number of Recognition and Early Intervention flags.
2. An evaluation of the overall usage by Department personnel at all levels.
3. Comparison of annual data and
4. Suggested revisions to this policy or the system.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/14/2018
Revised: 12/18/2020
Revised: 12/21/2021
Revised: 11/13/2023
Revised: 9/9/2024
Revised: 5/22/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

