OPD - 15.1
Page 1 of 8
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Compensation
Employee Benefits
Workers’ Compensation
Retirement
Liability Insurance
Employee Assistance Program
Holidays
Comp Time
Overtime
Tuition Reimbursement
Employee Separation
Employee Lockers
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
I. PURPOSE
The City of Olivette offers a wide range of benefits for full time employees. Officers
may also elect to enroll dependents for medical and dental insurance coverage.
II. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
A. Compensation
The City Manager shall maintain the City’s Classification and Pay Plan adopted by the
City Council, recommend appropriate amendments thereto as the need arises, and
recommend to the Council at or prior to submission of each annual budget whether the
rate of pay contained in the pay plan and the compensation of employees not covered by
the pay plan should remain unchanged, be increased or be decreased for the next fiscal
year, all to the end that all positions in the City service requiring similar qualifications
and having similar duties and responsibilities are equally compensated.
All positions covered by the Classification and Pay Plan shall be assigned a Classification
Plan Grade Number by the City Council.

-- 1 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 2 of 8
The compensation of paid emergency, seasonal, temporary and part-time personnel not
covered by the Pay Plan and whose compensation has not been specifically set by the
Council is to be established as the rate of pay prevalent in the area for the type of work
performed at the time the work is performed, as determined by the City Manager.
B. Group Medical and Dental Insurance
The City participates in group health insurance and dental insurance plans which are
available to all regular full-time employees. Should the employee elect to participate in
the group plans, the cost of the insurance is shared between the City and the employee.
Employee insurance payments are paid through payroll deduction. Employees should
consult the Human Resources Department for further information.
C. Group Life Insurance
The City participates in a group life insurance plan available to all regular full-time
employees. The City pays 100% of life insurance. Should the death of a City employee
occur, the City will pay the recipients of the life insurance policy one (1) year's base
salary of the deceased. Employees should consult the Human Resources Department for
further information.
D. Worker’s Compensation
1. Coverage
The City provides workers’ compensation coverage for all employees through the
State of Missouri Workers Compensation Division. The Division provides for
medical expenses and partial compensation to employees injured on the job. The
cost of such coverage is paid by the City and covers most injuries sustained on the
job. Neither the City nor its workers’ compensation insurance carrier will be
liable for the payment of workers’ compensation benefits for injuries that occur
during an employee’s voluntary participation in any off-duty recreational, social,
or athletic activity sponsored by the City. Such injuries, however, may be covered
under the employees’ personal medical insurance plan.
2. Report of Accidents and Injuries
All employees must comply with any initial reporting requirements established by
the City. Employees are responsible for notifying the Human Resources Manager
or the Chief of Police, in writing, of the time, place, and nature of any work-
related accident, or injury, or occupational disease as soon as possible, but no later
than 24 hours after the accident or diagnosis.

-- 2 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 3 of 8
Thereafter, an employee on worker’s compensation leave must report to the City
on a weekly basis, or as otherwise directed by the Chief of Police. An employee
must immediately notify the City when released to return to work.
3. Filing Claims
All workers’ compensation claims must be filed with the Human Resources
Manager through appropriate supervisory channels.
4. Salary Continuation Benefits
Temporary, part-time, and seasonal employees are ineligible for salary
continuation benefits and will only receive the benefits afforded to them under the
Missouri workers compensation system. When a full-time employee incurs an on-
the-job injury or illness that is covered by the City’s workers’ compensation
carrier and requires the employee to take workers’ compensation leave, the
employee is eligible for salary continuation benefits until sick and/or vacation in
lieu of sick leave is exhausted. Employees receiving temporary income benefit
payments may use a combination of sick and/or vacation in lieu of sick leave to
receive a full pay check. While using accrued leave to receive a full pay check,
accrual balances will be adjusted accordingly. To receive salary continuation
benefits, the injured employee is required to exchange his/her workers’
compensation temporary income benefit payments for the employee’s regular pay
checks.
Under no circumstances will an employee on workers’ compensation leave
receive paid benefits (e.g., workers’ compensation, salary benefits, salary
continuation benefits, disability insurance benefits, or paid leave time) in excess
of the amount the employee would normally receive in base salary/wages
(excluding overtime, shift differential, or any other type of extra compensation) if
the employee was not injured and able to return to work.
E. Liability Insurance
The City of Olivette maintains a liability protection plan which provides coverage for
bodily injury and property damage. Indemnification and legal assistance are also
provided to personnel who become the target of civil action while acting in the scope of
their duties. Subsequent costs are assumed by the City.
F. Employee Assistance Program
The City of Olivette has adopted an Employee Assistance Program (EAP) for all
employees and their dependents. Among the different types of problems covered under
the program are stress, depression, anxiety, workplace difficulties, substance abuse,
marital problems, family and parenting conflicts, child and adolescent issues, violence,

-- 3 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 4 of 8
and unhealthy lifestyles. The EAP can also provide assistance with, and referrals for,
community resources, financial and legal issues, and child and elder care resources. For
more information please contact the Chief of Police or the Human Resources Manager.
G. Holidays
1. The City of Olivette observes the following paid holidays each year for regular
employees:
A. New Year’s Day
B. Martin Luther King Jr. Day
C. President’s Day
D. Memorial Day
E. Juneteenth
F. Independence Day
G. Labor Day
H. Veterans' Day
I. Thanksgiving Day
J. Day after Thanksgiving
K. Christmas Day
2. Holiday Occurring During Worker’s Compensation Leave
An employee on worker's compensation leave will not receive holiday pay, unless
otherwise required by law.
3. Separating Employees
Except in extraordinary situations, separating employees will not be allowed to
use a holiday as their final day of employment. Exceptions must be scheduled and
authorized in advance by the Chief of Police.
4. Other Religious Holidays
Employees may request an approved absence to celebrate a religious holiday that
is not a scheduled City holiday. If approved, the employee must charge the time to
vacation, paid personal leave, accrued holiday leave or time off without pay.
5. Police Holiday Accrual
Police Patrol Officers will be paid $75 for each of the designated holidays,
whether on or off duty. In addition, public safety employees, reporting for duty
and working a scheduled shift on an actual holiday, shall receive 5 hours of
compensatory time per shift.

-- 4 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 5 of 8
H. All full-time employees will receive one (1) personal day each year. The personal day
will be the number of hours for the officer to take one (1) regular workday off. Personal
days may not be accrued.
I. Tuition Reimbursement
1. This program is subject to availability of funds, approval of the Chief of Police
and the business and operational needs of the City of Olivette.
2. Full-time employees are eligible for tuition and book reimbursement for classes
at any accredited college or university for which the employee earns a grade of
“C” or better for coursework.
3. Coursework must be part of a program that culminates in a degree or certificate
being awarded.
4. A degree plan must be submitted with the application for tuition
reimbursement. The Chief of Police and the City Manager must approve all
tuition reimbursement plans as being beneficial to the Department and applicable
to the employee’s current position.
5. An application for tuition and book reimbursement must be submitted and
approved BEFORE an employee enrolls in a program of study.
6. Upon submittal of satisfactory proof of completion for all coursework enrolled
for the semester, full-time employees are eligible for tuition and book
reimbursement as follows:
a. Associates Degree or equivalent – 100% reimbursement
b. Bachelor or Master Degree – 50% reimbursement
7. If the employee fails to submit a tuition reimbursement form within sixty (60)
days of the conclusion of coursework for the semester, the employee forfeits the
tuition reimbursement benefit for that semester.
8. The total reimbursement to an employee for tuition and books shall not exceed
$1,800.00 per calendar year.
9. As part of the tuition reimbursement application, employees agree to remain
with the City for two years after completion of the course. If this agreement is not
satisfied, the City will deduct from the employee’s final paycheck, to the
maximum extent allowed by law, the actual dollar amount of any tuition
reimbursement provided during the preceding twenty-four (24) month period
before the date of termination or resignation. If the final paycheck deduction is

-- 5 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 6 of 8
insufficient to cover the coursework reimbursement any outstanding amount due
will be paid by the employee.
10. Specialized accreditations, those that accredit only specific kinds of schools,
such as home study institutions or trade and technical schools, will not be
recognized unless written approval was given prior to the implementation of this
policy.
11. Courses shall not interfere with the employee’s working schedule or
performance of position duties.
12. Tuition and reimbursement is not available for expenses already covered by
other types of assistance or benefits, such as scholarships, tuition waivers, grants,
or other programs.
J. Compensation for Overtime and Compensatory Time
1. Overtime and compensatory time are credited at a rate of one and one-half
times the actual amount worked. The maximum amount of compensatory time is
72 hours.
2. At the City’s option, an officer may be given compensatory time off in lieu of
monetary overtime pay.
3. An employee that appears in civil or criminal court to testify on any matter not
related to his or her duties as a member of the Department will not receive
overtime or compensatory time.
K. Telephone and Address Files
It is the responsibility of each employee to ensure that they notify the Deputy Chief of
any change in address and phone numbers.
L. Employee Separation
The City of Olivette designates all employee separations as one of the following types:
1. Resignation
An employee who intends to resign is requested to notify in writing the Chief of
Police at least two weeks prior to the last day of work. Employees who fail to give
a two-week notice are typically not eligible for rehire. The Chief of Police is
responsible for immediately notifying the Human Resources Manager when he/
she is notified of a resignation.

-- 6 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 7 of 8
2. Retirement
An employee who intends to retire is requested to notify in writing the Chief of
Police 60 days prior to the date of retirement to ensure that all required paperwork
is timely prepared and submitted.
3. Reductions in Force/Reorganization
An employee may be separated from City employment when it is deemed
necessary by reason of shortage of funds or work, the abolition of the position, or
other material change in the duties of the City.
4. Termination
The City may terminate any employee for any reason and at any time, with or
without cause. Any separation of employment that does not fall under one of the
other defined categories in this policy will be considered a termination.
If any employee is dismissed or terminated for cause, the employee will be
provided with: a written statement citing the reason for dismissal or termination;
the effective date of dismissal or termination; and a statement of the status of
accrued employee benefits after dismissal or termination.
5. Reference Policy for Separated Individuals
In the absence of a signed release by the former employee, the City’s policy is to
provide neutral references for former employees, regardless of the reason for their
departure. Neutral references consist of verification of hiring and termination
dates, position held and rate of pay. Only the Chief of Police or the Human
Resources Manager are authorized to provide references.
6. Compensation
Employees who separate shall receive payment for all earned salary and certified
compensatory time, and those employees who have completed six or more months
of service shall receive payment for all unused accrued annual leave and/or
unused accrued compensatory leave time, subject to deductions.
7. Death.
If a City of Olivette employee dies, his or her designated beneficiary or estate will
be paid all earned pay and payable benefits.
8. Return of Equipment

-- 7 of 8 --

OPD - 15.1
Page 8 of 8
When an employee is separated, it is his or her responsibility to return all
Department-issued uniforms and equipment.
M. Employee Lockers
1. All lockers issued to employees of the Olivette Police Department are
considered Department property and as such are subject to inspection from time to
time at the direction of the Chief of Police. All lockers are issued by the Deputy
Chief.
2. All officers and employees are authorized one (1) locker.
3. Lockers will be marked with the officer’s name using “Dymo” tape.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 1/20/2010
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 3/13/2018
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 11/13/2023
Revised: 11/4/2025
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 8 of 8 --

