OPD - 15.3
Page 1 of 13
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Body Armor
Body Worn Camera (BWC)
Equipment
Grooming
Tattoos
Uniforms
________________________________________________________________________
EQUIPMENT, UNIFORMS AND GROOMING
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish policy and procedure concerning
wearing of the uniform, body armor and personal grooming.
II. DEFINITIONS
A. Tattoo – the act or practice of marking the skin with indelible or semi-permanent
designs, forms, figures, art, etc., by making punctures in the skin and inserting pigment or
applying substances to the skin.
B. Scarification – the act of intentional cutting of the skin for the purpose of creating a
design, form, figure, or art. Department employees are prohibited from displaying this
kind of art while on duty or representing the Department in any official capacity.
C. Branding – the act of intentional burning of the skin for the purpose of creating a
design, form, figure, or art. Department employees are prohibited from displaying this
kind of art while on duty or representing the Department in any official capacity.
D. Piercing – the act of creating a hole in any part of the body for the purpose of inserting
an object, jewelry, or ornamentation.
E. Full sleeve tattoo – large tattoo or series of small tattoos that are typically intricate
from shoulder to wrist.

-- 1 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 2 of 13
F. Unauthorized tattoos, scarifications, or brands – unauthorized is defined as any tattoos,
scarifications or brands considered inappropriate, unprofessional, or offensive as outlined
in Section 8.
III. EQUIPMENT
A. All equipment issued by the Department will remain the property of the Olivette
Police Department, and upon separation the employee shall return all issued items. If
for any reason the employee is unable to return any equipment (i.e. lost, damaged,
etc.) the Department shall be reimbursed the replacement price for the items. The
replacement cost shall be the current cost of the item.
1. All uniformed officers with the Olivette Police Department will be issued:
QUANTITY ITEM
a. 1 Glock Model 45
b. 3 17 round magazines
c. 52 9 mm rounds
d. 1 Oleoresin Capsicum Pepper Spray
e. 1 Pair of handcuffs & key
f. 2 TASER Cartridges
g. 1 Portable radio w/charger, extra battery,
and accessories
h. 1 Flashlight w/charger
i. 1 Duty belt
j. 1 Duty holster
k. 1 TASER holster
l. 1 TASER cartridge pouch
m. 1 Flashlight holder
n. 1 Magazine pouch
o. 1 OC spray case
p. 1 Handcuff case
q. 1 Body Armor
r. 1 Traffic Safety Vest
s. 2 Nametags (1 cloth, 1 metal)
t. 2 Badges (1 breast, 1 hat)
u. 1 Identification card
v. 1 Gun Safe (optional per policy)
w. 1 Gas mask and carry bag
x. 1 Air purifying cartridge
y. 1 Olivette City Center Building Access
Card

-- 2 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 3 of 13
2. On July 1st, the City provides a $800 per fiscal year clothing allowance for
each officer. From this allowance, the employee must furnish at least:
a. All uniforms, including Class A
b. Boots/shoes
c. Duty Hat
d. Uniform accessories (tie, longevity stars, USA flag pin, etc.)
e. Any other equipment as directed by the Chief of Police
Personnel authorized by the Chief of Police to wear civilian attire as daily
uniforms may submit receipts for reimbursement as a part of their yearly clothing
allowance.
Civilian attire that is eligible for reimbursement includes:
• Sport Coat/Suits
• Slacks
• Dress Shirts
• Ties
• Belts
• Dress Shoes
3. Any items purchased with the Officer’s Department clothing allowance within
30 days of notice of separation will remain property of the Department and shall
be turned in to the Department upon separation. The cost of any items not
returned to the Department will be deducted from the employee’s final paycheck.
4. No piece of the uniform will be worn by a Police Department employee while
off-duty that immediately identifies him/herself as an employee of the City.
B. All equipment shall be properly maintained by the employee. Any defects in the
equipment must be immediately brought to the attention of their immediate supervisor or
replaced by the employee.
C. There shall be no modification made to issued equipment unless exceptional need can
be demonstrated and approved by the Chief of Police. Any request for modification shall
be forwarded through the chain of command by the requesting officer with approval
made by the Chief of Police on a case-by-case basis.
D. Body Worn Camera
1. It is always the policy of this Department that the Body Worn Camera (BWC)
be used to record contacts with the public by an officer performing his/her official
patrol duties (i.e., motorist and pedestrian contacts; on-view investigations;
assigned calls for service). The intent of this policy is to allow the means for:

-- 3 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 4 of 13
a. Recording evidentiary or copious notes.
b. Recording controversial or confrontational contacts and incidents.
c. Protecting officers against false claims, complaints, or allegations.
d. Assisting the Department regarding the administrative/investigative
process.
2. Guidelines/Restrictions for Using the Body Worn Camera
a. To ensure immediate accessibility, BWC’s will be carried on the officer
as a part of the duty uniform. All digital recordings will be downloaded
daily by returning the BWC to the Data Port Cradle before or at the end of
the Officers shift.
b. Regarding potential citizen complaints or inquiries, officers should give
the supervisor an opportunity to review the recording prior to going off
duty. Incidents of significant concern should be downloaded and reported
through the chain of command.
c. The Department has the authority to request and retain any/all
recordings for administrative purposes. Officers are required to provide
said recordings upon request. Supervisors and commanders who initiate
and/or assigned to review or investigate complaints/inquiries shall acquire
and listen to the recording. Department staff will determine the need to
retain the recording based on the nature of the complaint/incident.
d. The BWC shall always be used in a professional manner and shall not
be used to record personal conversations between officers of the
Department, other city employees or officials. In conformance with
Federal law, electronic surveillance of a non-consenting two-part
conversation of which the officer is not a part of said conversation or is
not within normal hearing range of said conversation, is prohibited.
e. Watch commanders and shift supervisors are responsible for ensuring
assigned personnel are utilizing the BWC in compliance with this policy.
To that end, Watch Commanders have the authority to check officers’
recordings randomly and routinely. Likewise, Watch Commanders are
encouraged to remind officers about the need to have their BWC ready for
use.
f. Recordings containing evidentiary value to criminal charges shall be
entered as evidence in the usual manner.
E. Department Identification Cards

-- 4 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 5 of 13
1. All Department personnel are issued an identification card which includes the
employee’s photograph, name, rank/position and DSN. Department identification
cards will be displayed upon request in non-emergency situations. Exceptions
may include officers working in an undercover capacity, or other instances as
authorized by the Chief of Police.
2. All employees shall verbally identify themselves while conducting official
Department business on the telephone.
3. Department identification cards will be issued to retired members of this
Department.
4. With the authorization of the Chief of Police, identification cards will be:
a. Updated due to the change in employee status or rank
b. Renewed on expiration date when officer’s status is still active
c. Replaced due to loss or theft
d. Revoked due to separation of employment under all circumstances
IV. UNIFORMS
A. The Class A Dress Uniform of this Command consists of the following:
1. For rank of Lieutenant and above:
a. Department approved dress jacket
b. Department approved navy blue pants
c. Department approved long sleeve white shirt
2. For rank of Sergeant and below:
a. Department approved long sleeve navy blue shirt
b. Department approved navy blue pants
3. Black tie
4. Hi-Gloss (clarino) black leather shoes (no boots)

-- 5 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 6 of 13
5. Department approved Hi-Gloss (clarino) leather duty belt with gold or silver
buckle
6. Department approved Hi-Gloss duty holster
7. Department approved duty hat with cloth band (Gold for Sergeants and above,
silver for Corporal and Patrol Officers)
8. Department approved uniform accessories on the dress uniform shirt will be
worn as stated below.
9. Department approved uniform accessories on the jacket will be worn as stated
below with the following exceptions:
a. Rank insignia will be designated on the jacket epaulets and/or sleeve.
b. No longevity star pins will be worn on the jacket. Stars will be sewn on
the left jacket sleeve.
B. Department approved uniform accessories shall be worn as follows:
1. Badge – Left breast of uniform shirt above the left pocket
2. Lieutenant Bars – Open Collar: parallel to collar seam
Closed Collar: parallel to collar seam
3. Name Tag – Aligned with the top seam of the right uniform shirt pocket
4. Longevity Stars – Horizontally above the name tag.
5. USA Flag Pin – Horizontally above longevity stars. If an officer has not
accumulated longevity stars, then the flag pin will be worn horizontally above the
name tag.
a. Veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, with an honorable discharge, may
wear a modified flag ribbon on a slide bar with their branch of service
ribbon displayed on the left side of the flag pin.
6. Award Ribbons – Aligned with top seam of the left uniform shirt pocket.
7. CIT Pin - Aligned with the top seam of the right uniform pocket. This pin is
for officers who have completed CIT training.
8. Recognition Pins – Pins will be approved and worn at the discretion of the
Chief of Police.

-- 6 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 7 of 13
9. Sergeants and above shall wear gold toned badges, name tags, uniform buttons,
rank insignia, longevity pins, accompanying metal buckles, and fasteners.
10. Corporals and Patrol officers shall wear silver toned badges, name tags,
uniform buttons, longevity pins, accompanying metal buckles, and fasteners.
C. The Class B Uniform of this Command consists of the following:
1. Department approved Load Bearing Vest (LBV) and Department approved
LBV accessories
2. Department approved pants
3. Department approved long sleeve or short sleeved shirt
4. Black in color shoes or boots
5. Department approved duty belt and duty holster
a. Items worn on the duty belt, in addition to the duty holster will be at the
individual officer’s discretion. All accessory items/pouches worn on the
duty belt shall match the finish of the duty belt (i.e. basket weave belt with
basketweave pouches or nylon belt with nylon or plain black pouches).
6. Uniformed employees of the rank of Sergeant and below shall wear
department approved dark blue shirts. The Chief of Police, Deputy Chief and
Lieutenants may wear either a dark blue or white uniform shirt.
D. The Class C Uniform of this Command consists of the following:
1. Business attire or other Department approved pants and shirts unless their
assignment requires otherwise.
E. The Class D Uniform of this Command consists of the following:
1. Department approved shorts or pants
2. Department approved shirt
3. Department approved Body Armor
a. While wearing the Class D bicycle uniform, Officers shall have the
option to wear their Department body armor under their approved uniform
shirt or with their Load Bearing Vest (LBV) and Department approved
LBV accessories.

-- 7 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 8 of 13
4. Department approved duty belt and duty holster
a. Items worn on the duty belt, in addition to the duty holster will be at the
individual officer’s discretion. All accessory items/pouches worn on the
duty belt shall match the finish of the duty belt (i.e. basket weave belt with
basketweave pouches or nylon belt with nylon or plain black pouches).
5. Black in color shoes or boots
6. Department approved helmet
F. Except while wearing the Class A Uniform, uniformed employees shall have the
discretion to wear either long or short sleeved uniform shirts.
G. Officers wearing blue uniform shirts shall wear black or dark navy-blue undershirts.
Officers wearing white uniform shirts shall wear white undershirts.
H. All on-duty uniformed officers shall wear Department issued body armor unless
exempt as follows:
1. The officer holds the rank of Chief of Police or Deputy Chief or is assigned to a
position which would specifically allow him/her to wear civilian clothing or other
Department approved clothing. However, such officers will immediately don
Department issued body armor upon being dispatched or acting as back up on
calls for service or when participating in the execution of search warrants, high-
risk entries, tactical operations, or stakeouts without exception regardless of the
jurisdiction in which the events occur.
I. Officers of this Command that are activated for the Major Case Squad will wear
business attire unless directed otherwise by the Commander of the Major Case Squad.
J. To provide a well-attired, professional appearance, all uniforms are to be kept clean
and pressed, with metal items polished. Any uniform clothing items or accessories
determined to be in sub-standard condition by an employee’s immediate supervisor are to
be replaced by the employee at their own expense or with their uniform allowance.
V. GROOMING
A. Male Personnel: Head and Facial Grooming
1. Hair shall be trimmed and worn neatly.
a. Hair may not fall more than halfway down the ear on the sides. The
back may not extend past the middle of the uniform collar.

-- 8 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 9 of 13
b. The back and sides of the neck below the hairline shall be shaved or
trimmed.
c. Hairstyles, such as Mohawks, ponytails, buns, etc. are
prohibited.
2. Sideburns:
a. If an individual chooses to wear sideburns, they shall be neatly trimmed
and tapered in the same manner as the haircut.
b. Sideburns shall be evenly trimmed on each side of the face and shall not
extend past the bottom of the earlobes.
3. Mustaches:
a. Mustaches must be neatly trimmed and shall not exceed 1/4 inch
beyond the corners of the mouth.
b. No extreme styles are permitted.
4. Beards:
a. Beards and goatees must be groomed and maintained and shall not
exceed 1/2 inch in length, with no portion being exceptionally longer
than the rest.
b. Beards and goatees must be worn with a mustache.
c. If facial hair is suspected of interfering with the secure fit of the gas
mask, the officer will be required to shave to make it fit.
B. Female Personnel: Hairstyles
1. The hair shall be neatly shaped and arranged.
a. Hair may not extend past the middle of the uniform shirt collar.
b. Hairstyles, such as Mohawks, multiple ponytails, etc. are prohibited.
c. The hair may not interfere with the wearing of the uniform headgear.
C. Jewelry and Piercings

-- 9 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 10 of 13
1. Employees will wear only jewelry that reflects conservative taste, style, and
color. Jewelry shall not, in any manner, interfere with the assigned duties of the
employee.
2. All employees are prohibited from attaching, affixing, or displaying objects,
articles, jewelry or any other device or ornamentation to or through the ear, nose,
tongue, or any other exposed body part, including any items that are visible
through the clothing except as stated below.
3. Earrings for female employees must be conservative both in size and
appearance and must not be obscene, advocate sexual, racial, ethnic, or religious
discrimination. This does not prohibit the wearing of small crosses, Star of David
etc. Male employees are prohibited from wearing earrings.
4. Finger rings are limited to one (1) per hand. In the case of a wedding set, this
will be considered one ring.
5. Medic alert bracelets and watches are allowed.
6. Employees in uniform will not wear jewelry, such as chains, in an exposed
manner.
D. Fingernails
Fingernails shall be neatly trimmed and of a length not to interfere with the use of police
equipment.
E. Fragrances
Fragrances, such as perfume, after-shave, cologne, etc., will not be used in excess.
F. Cosmetics
The use of cosmetics shall be kept to a minimum and will reflect a conservative and
neutral appearance.
G. Electronic Devices
Employees are prohibited from wearing Bluetooth type devices (AirPods, Beats, etc.) in
or on their ear anytime during their shift or assignment. Medically required hearing aids
or wired earpieces, that are worn in ear, connected to the Department issued police radio
are permitted.
H. Tattoos, Brands and Body Mutilation

-- 10 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 11 of 13
The Department has a strong interest in promoting confidence with the general public by
having our employees maintain a uniform, professional appearance and image. Exposed
tattoos must be consistent with this interest and must not be deemed offensive.
1. Department employees shall not display tattoos that are visible when wearing
an open collar uniform above the collarbone as well as the face, neck, or head.
2. Those seeking new visible tattoos or revisions to existing tattoos on their body
must forward a Tattoo Approval Request Form, #OPD – F1179, with a detailed
description and photograph(s)/drawing, if possible, of the tattoo through the
appropriate chain of command to the Chief of Police for approval.
3. Full sleeve tattoos are permitted as long as they do not violate any sections of
this Order.
4. Whether approved or denied, a copy of the completed Tattoo Approval Request
Form will be returned to the requesting employee.
5. The Department reserves the right to require any tattoo to be
covered/removed. If an employee is asked to cover/remove an existing tattoo,
the employee has the option to remove the tattoo at their own expense; keep it
covered through the use of Department-approved clothing or utilize a tattoo cover
sleeve, as approved by the Chief of Police, for those areas that cannot be covered
by clothing.
6. Tattoos may disqualify employees from specialized assignments where a
specialized uniform would expose existing unacceptable tattoos.
7. Human Resources will maintain a file concerning each tattoo request and the
determination made relative to that request.
8. The display of any tattoos, scarifications, or branding considered inappropriate,
unprofessional, or offensive, regardless of its location, by any employee of the
Department while on or off-duty is prohibited. This includes training, secondary
employment, or any other instance in which an employee is representing the City
of Olivette in an official capacity.
a. The following includes, but is not limited to, the types of unauthorized body
art prohibited by this order:
• Depictions of nudity or violence
• Sexually explicit or vulgar art, words, phrases, or profane language
• Symbols likely to incite a strong reaction in the workplace, i.e.,
swastikas, pentagrams or similar symbols.

-- 11 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 12 of 13
• Initials, acronyms, or numbers that represent criminal or historically
oppressive organizations, i.e., AB, HH, KKK, SS, MM, BGF, 666, 88
or any street gang names, numbers and/or symbols.
b. Any employee of the Department who obtains unauthorized tattoos,
scarifications, or branding considered inappropriate, unprofessional, or
offensive shall:
• Remove the body art at their own expense; or
• Cover the body art with apparel appropriate or applicable to the
employee’s assignment.
9. The piercing and wearing of associated jewelry in visible body parts is
prohibited except as provided for in Department General Order OPD – 15.3.
10. When deemed operationally necessary, sworn Department members in
undercover assignments may display tattoos, scarifications, branding, or jewelry
otherwise prohibited by this order with the approval of the Chief of Police.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/4/2010
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 7/1/2011
Revised: 5/15/2013
Revised: 2/19/2014
Revised: 7/8/2014
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/6/2018
Revised: 8/13/2018
Revised: 1/14/2020
Revised: 12/7/2020
Revised: 2/12/2021
Revised: 5/12/2022
Revised: 7/14/2022
Revised: 10/18/2022
Revised: 3/16/2023
Revised: 4/05/2023
Revised: 1/9/2024
Revised: 5/23/2024

-- 12 of 13 --

OPD - 15.3
Page 13 of 13
Revised: 2/3/2025
Revised: 2/28/2025
Revised: 1/28/2026
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 13 of 13 --

