OPD - 15.5
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Off-Duty Secondary Employment
Arrests – Police Related Employment
Waiver of Benefits
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for off-duty secondary
employment.
II. OFF-DUTY SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT:
A. The Chief of Police must ensure the continued efficiency and effectiveness of the
Department while simultaneously reducing or eliminating conflicts of interests. To this
end, the Chief shall restrict, regulate, and coordinate, according to whatever reasonable
controls he/she deems necessary, the conduct of employees, to include secondary
employment. It is the policy of the Department, therefore, to restrict and regulate all
secondary/off-duty employment, to provide guidelines to employees, to inform them of
the types of employment that are appropriate; and to prohibit secondary employment that
may impair the efficiency of the Department or conflict with their duties and
responsibilities. It is each employee’s responsibility to adhere to the policy and processes
contained within this General Order.
B. All employees of this Department, when wishing to take secondary employment, must
submit the following through the chain of command to the Chief of Police for his/her
approval:
Request for Permission to Engage in Secondary Employment Form #OPD -
F1071 (pg. 1),
Request for Permission to Engage in Secondary Employment Waiver of Benefits
#OPD - F1071 (pg. 2),
City of Olivette Request for Secondary Employment pdf document.
No employee shall engage in such employment without written approval of the Chief of
Police. Requests may be denied, or approval may be revoked at any time by the Chief of
Police if the officer fails to perform adequately on duty, receives disciplinary action, or

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 15.5
Page 2 of 6
for any other reason deemed to be in the best interest of the Department by the Chief of
Police.
Included in the request will be:
1. Precise nature of the work to be performed,
2. Hours or schedule of work to be performed, and
3. Possess a valid Security Guard License, if required.
4. Request for Department equipment to be utilized, if required.
C. Supervisors and commanders should continuously review the performance of
employees who engage in secondary employment and will recommend its termination if
the officer does not fully meet Department responsibilities.
D. All employees are reminded that their conduct, on and off duty, including secondary
employment, is required to meet the standards of professional employees, and must meet
the requirements of this manual.
III. DEFINITIONS:
A. POLICE RELATED SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT – Employment wherein an
officer of this Department is requested by an entity as a Police Officer, and which may
entail the use of police powers granted by the State of Missouri or the City of Olivette.
B. SECURITY RELATED SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT – An employee is hired as a
security officer or watchman by a private entity. The police uniform is not worn, and
police powers are not used. This type of employment is performed outside the city limits
of Olivette.
C. NON-POLICE RELATED SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT – Employment that is of
the type where an employee is hired and not expected to exercise any police or security
related skills.
D. CONFLICT OF INTEREST– Any activity inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict
with the duties, functions or responsibilities of employment with the City of Olivette.
E. PROBATION – For the purpose of this General Order, means while an employee of
this Department is in the initial twelve (12) month probationary period. Police and
security related secondary employment will not be approved during this period.
IV. RESTRICTIONS:
A. Secondary employment should not constitute a conflict of interest. No employee
shall solicit secondary employment while in an on-duty status.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 15.5
Page 3 of 6
B. All work performed while engaged in secondary employment shall be limited to the
duties, hours, locations, and employer listed on the approved Secondary Employment
Request form. No work should be approved if it would place the employee in a position
that might bring discredit on the Department or gives the appearance of a conflict of
interest. Examples of prohibited employment are as follows:
1. At any establishment where the primary business is the selling of or keeping of
intoxicants;
2. As a process server, re-possessor, or bill collector, tower of vehicles, or in any
other employment in which police authority might tend to be used to collect
money or merchandise for private purposes;
3. Personal investigations for the private sector or any employment which might
require the employee to have access to police information, files, records, or
services as a condition of employment;
4. In police uniform in the performance of tasks other than tasks associated with
Police Related Secondary Employment;
5. Which assists (in any manner) the case preparation for the defense in any
criminal or civil action or proceeding;
6. For a business or labor group that is on strike;
7. For establishments that sell pornographic books, magazines, sexual devices, or
videos, or that otherwise provide entertainment or services of a sexual nature;
8. Employment by any individual, business, or agency, that would violate or tend
to violate the provisions of policies relating to associating with known criminals;
or
9. Employment that would in any way discredit City employment, detract from
his/her duties, or take preference over on-duty needs or overtime required by City
employment.
C. Any employee excused from duty, on light duty, or on sick leave due to an injury or
illness, may not engage in any secondary employment.
D. Employees may not use Department records of a confidential nature in conjunction
with any secondary employment.
E. Unless specific approval is granted by the Chief of Police, Police Related Secondary
Employment is generally limited to within the City of Olivette.

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 15.5
Page 4 of 6
F. A Security Officer license issued by the proper authority may be required for security
related secondary employment. It is the Officer’s responsibility to obtain and maintain
such license. Proof that a security license was obtained may be required by the Chief of
Police prior to approval of the request for security related secondary employment
G. When the City of Olivette Police uniform is worn for Police Related Secondary
Employment, all on-duty uniform regulations apply.
H. An employee engaged in secondary employment is subject to call-out in case of an
emergency and is expected to leave that employment in such situations.
I. Secondary employment cannot interfere with regular duty scheduling or on-call
responsibilities. On-call responsibilities shall take precedence over secondary
employment.
J. All Department owned uniforms and equipment (including police vehicles) may be
used for Police Related Secondary Employment within the City of Olivette. Use of
Department owned uniforms and equipment for Police Related Secondary Employment
outside of the City of Olivette must be approved by the Chief of Police.
K. Department uniforms or vehicles that indicate affiliation with the City of Olivette may
not be used for Security-Related Secondary Employment outside of the City of Olivette.
Use of equipment other than uniforms or vehicles will be subject to approval by the Chief
of Police. Officers who want to carry a non-Department issued sidearm for secondary
employment outside the City must furnish their own weapon and must qualify annually
with same. Sidearms to be carried must comply with General Order OPD - 9.2
Authorized Weapons.
L. When an entity requests a Department employee to perform Security-Related
Secondary Employment outside the City of Olivette, and does not provide a uniform, the
employee shall wear Department-approved tactical pants and a Department-approved
polo shirt that clearly identifies them as a law enforcement officer, without indicating
affiliation with the City of Olivette.
M. While performing Police Related Secondary Employment, such employment is
considered a function of the police powers vested in officers by virtue of their oath of
office with the City. While performing Security or Non-Police Related Secondary
Employment, such employment is not considered a function of the police powers vested
in officers by virtue of their oath of office with the City. While on duty, no employee
shall solicit any person or business for the purpose of gaining secondary employment.
N. Employees shall not work any combination of their regular duty assignment (to
include any form of mandatory overtime/compensatory time/on-call responsibilities) and
secondary employment that total more than 16 hours in any 24-hour period.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 15.5
Page 5 of 6
O. Secondary employment, including administrative tasks or duties related to secondary
employment, is prohibited during those hours when the employee is on-duty and being
paid by the City of Olivette.
V. ARRESTS – POLICE RELATED SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT:
A. Officers working Police Related Secondary Employment within the City of Olivette
will be under the direct supervision of the on-duty watch commander.
B. Arrests within the limits of the City may be made without warrant while engaged in
Police Related Secondary Employment but shall be in accordance with RSMo. 544.216.
An officer that makes an arrest within the City limits while performing Police Related
Secondary Employment, will contact the on-duty watch commander to request an on-duty
officer who will handle the report, prisoner conveyance, processing, etc.
C. The watch commander may, for specific incidents, require the officer working Police
Related Secondary Employment to handle the report, prisoner processing, etc., if, in the
watch commander’s judgment, there is insufficient on-duty manpower available or there
are other extenuating circumstances.
D. All other incidents, in which no arrest is made, will be handled by an on-duty officer
summoned to the scene.
VI. ADMINISTRATION:
A. The Secondary Employment Request form shall be filed in the employee’s personnel
file.
B. The approved request is subject to periodic review by the Chief of Police and must be
renewed annually at the beginning of the City’s fiscal year during the month of July.
Officers shall communicate any changes with the Chief of Police as soon as possible.
C. Entities requesting employees of this Department to fulfill Police or Security Related
Secondary Employment must compensate the employee at a minimum rate of $55.00 per
hour.
D. Scheduling of secondary employment requests will be conducted by the Deputy Chief
of Police or designated person in his/her absence.
E. It will be the responsibility of the employee to collect all payments earned for
secondary employment directly from the hiring entity. All employees shall comply with
Federal and State guidelines for self-reporting of income earned from secondary
employment for income tax purposes.
VIII. WAIVER OF BENEFITS FOR SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 15.5
Page 6 of 6
A. Neither the Police Department nor the City of Olivette will award or grant any
Worker’s Compensation, money, salary, or disability pay for injuries or sickness
sustained, directly or indirectly, from secondary employment.
B. Neither the Police Department nor the City of Olivette shall be liable to provide legal
or other representation or financial protection in any civil, criminal or other proceeding
resulting from an employee’s secondary employment.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 10/15/2014
Revised: 4/10/2020
Revised: 10/1/2024
Revised: 11/18/2025
Revised: 2/17/2026
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

