OPD - 15.7
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Military
Deployment
Reintegration
MILITARY DEPLOYMENT AND REINTEGRATION
I. POLICY
Olivette Police personnel who serve in the National Guard or in the armed forces Reserve
Component provide a primary supplement to our Nation's armed forces, increasing both
the strength of the Nation and the well-being of our communities. Those Department
personnel who serve in the National Guard or the armed forces Reserve Component may
receive deployment orders on short notice. In order to plan for this eventuality, it is the
policy of the Olivette Police Department to have procedures for the military deployment
and reintegration of Department personnel.
II. PURPOSE
The purpose of this policy is to provide procedures for an employee's military
deployment and reintegration to the Department. This policy shall apply to employees
when their absence from the Department for military activation exceeds 180 days for pre-
deployment, deployment and post deployment. If an activation of less than 180 days
unexpectedly becomes extended beyond 180 days, the pre-deployment and deployment
aspects of the policy shall be applied to the extent practicable, as well as the reintegration
procedures.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. Activation - Order to active duty (other than for training) in the Federal Service.
B. Active duty - Full-time duty in the active military service of the United States,
including active duty or full-time training duty in the Reserve Component.
C. Guardsman - a person who is a member of the National Guard in any branch of the
United States Armed Forces.
D. Re-acclimation Process - Gradual, pre-determined steps, set by the Department, which
are intended to give returning military employees the opportunity to more comfortably,

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 15.7
Page 2 of 5
and successfully, reintroduce themselves into their positions with the Department after
deployment.
E. Reservist - a person who is a member of a Reserve Component of either the Army
National Guard of the United States, the Army Reserve, the Navy Reserve, the Marine
Corps Reserve, the Air National Guard of the United States, the Air Force Reserve, or the
Coast Guard Reserve.
IV. PRE-DEPLOYMENT PROCEDURES
A. Any employee seeking a military leave of absence shall provide the City with advance
notice of his/her intent to take a military leave. If advance notice is precluded by military
necessity or is otherwise impossible or unreasonable, considering all relevant
circumstances, the employee shall provide as prompt notice as possible.
B. The employee shall submit a copy of his/ her military orders to their supervisor as
soon as possible along with written notification to their immediate supervisor to include
the following:
1. Unit Name and identification.
2. Anticipated date(s) of mobilization.
3. Commanding officer's name, telephone number and e-mail address.
4. Immediate military supervisor's name, telephone number and email address.
5. Name of the military ombudsman (or equivalent), his/ her telephone number
and e-mail address.
C. The Deputy Chief of Police shall serve as the Department's point of contact.
D. The City's Human Resources Director shall serve as the City's Human Resources point
of contact.
E. Together, the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, and the
Human Resources Director shall meet with the employee prior to deployment regarding:
1. Employee benefits.
2. Salary continuation.
3. Reintegration into the Department.
4. Any other relevant information which may aid in deployment and later
reintegration.

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 15.7
Page 3 of 5
F. The Deputy Chief of Police shall notify the Olivette Municipal Court Administrator of
the anticipated dates of the employee's departure and return.
G. Prior to their deployment, personnel shall tum in their Department I.D. badges,
building access card, REJIS computer token and all issued keys, weapons and equipment
to the Deputy Chief of Police, or his/her designee. All weapons shall be stored in the
armory and all other items shall be stored in a secure area.
H. The employee's email and computer accounts will be suspended.
V. DEPLOYMENT PROCEDURES
A. During the deployed employee's absence, the Department shall provide support to the
employee and his/her immediate family through the Deputy Chief of Police and the City's
Human Resources Director.
B. The Deputy Chief of Police shall:
1. Keep up-to-date status on the deployed employee and provide the information
to the employee's immediate supervisor and the chain of command. The
information shall include, at a minimum, the employee's current status, active
needs, and family needs.
2. Provide the deployed employee's current e-mail and address information to the
Human Resource Director and ensure information related to changes in benefits
or open enrollment for benefits is sent to the employee.
3. Maintain a current file on the deployed employee, including the status of any
certifications, benefits updates missed, and e-mail and address information to be
made available for other Department members to maintain contact.
4. Send Department events, newsletters, and other information to assist the
deployed employee in maintaining an active link with his/her home.
C. Department members will be encouraged to maintain active contact with the deployed
employee.
VI. REINTEGRATION PROCEDURES
A. Upon completing his/her military service obligation, all Department personnel on a
military leave of absence shall return to work in a timely manner as established by
applicable laws. Failure to return to work after an approved military leave in a timely
manner, falsification of the reasons for taking the military leave or working elsewhere
while on the military leave can result in termination of the leave of absence and/or
discipline, up to and including termination of employment.

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 15.7
Page 4 of 5
B. Prior to returning to full duty, the returning employee shall meet with the Chief of
Police and Human Resources Director for a reintegration interview. The need for a
Re-acclimation process shall be evaluated, and a plan shall be developed as needed.
C. All Department personnel returning from a military leave of absence shall be
reinstated in accordance with and as required by applicable laws
.
D. Under certain circumstances, the City of Olivette may require an employee to
provide documentation demonstrating his/her eligibility to return to work such as, but not
limited to, a medical release and passage of the Department's Physical Performance
Standards and Assessment.
E. Upon return to work, the employee shall provide appropriate military documentation
to Human Resources as required by the City. This documentation may include the
amount of time served, pay received during the leave and type of duty performed.
F. Returning employees shall contact the Deputy Chief of Police regarding re-issuance of
all required equipment and ID card.
G. The Commander of the Bureau of Support Services shall provide to the employee
updated copies of General Orders and/or procedures, as needed. The officer shall review
them and sign a statement of understanding for each policy received.
H. The returning employee shall meet with the Training Coordinator to determine any
missed training or certifications that shall be completed. A schedule shall be made for the
accomplishment of required training tasks. The returning employee shall be required to
complete a short-term assignment with a Field Training Instructor for refresher training in
their assigned area.
I. The returning employee (if a Commissioned Police Officer) shall be required to
complete weapons qualifications in accordance with OPD - 9.3.
J. The employee’s email and computer accounts will be reinstated.
K. Form #OPD - 1165, “Military Post-Deployment Checklist” shall be completed. Each
item shall be signed off by the appropriate City employee when that task is completed. A
copy of the checklist shall be placed in the employee's personnel file.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 15.7
Page 5 of 5
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/21/2018
Revised: 12/18/2020
Revised: 11/13/2023
Revised: 9/9/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

