OPD – 15.8
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Employee Health
Wellness
Fitness for Duty
_______________________________________________________________________
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND WELLNESS
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish Department expectations of job-related
fitness and the assistance granted to members of the department in the pursuit of ongoing
employee wellness and fitness. Overall fitness for duty should be multifaceted and
include physical fitness, mental health, and implementing policies and practices that
improve workplace safety.
II. POLICY
It is the policy of this Department that all employees are required to maintain a level of
job-related physical, emotional, and psychological fitness to permit them to carry out the
essential functions of their duties as outlined in their assigned “Job Description.”
III. DEFINITIONS
Essential job functions - Particular job functions are essential if: removing the
function(s) would fundamentally alter the position; the position exists to perform
those function(s); there is a limited number of employees available among whom
performance of the function(s) can be distributed; or the function(s) are of a
highly specialized nature. For the position of police officer, such functions
include, but are not limited to, safely affecting a forcible arrest, suspect pursuit on
foot, and safely controlling combatants.
Critical Incident - Any situation faced by department members in the course of
their employment with the Department, on or off duty, that causes them to
experience unusually strong, negative emotional reactions after the event.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD – 15.8
Page 2 of 5
Critical Incident Management - A process designed to mitigate the
psychological impact of a traumatic event, thus preventing the subsequent
development of post-traumatic stress disorder. Critical Incident Stress Defusing
and Debriefing (CISD) are components of Critical Incident Management and
serve as early identification mechanisms for individuals who may require
additional assistance after a traumatic event.
IV. FITNESS FOR DUTY
The Department recognizes that functions of law enforcement often require a level of
general health and physical fitness not demanded by many other occupations. Employees
are expected to maintain a level of physical fitness and wellness necessary to perform
their job assignments and duties.
A. All sworn employees are required to complete a pre-employment medical
examination, drug screening, psychological assessment, and a physical
assessment. These activities will be coordinated for completion by the Human
Resources Administrator prior to the employee’s first day of work.
B. The Chief of Police, with the written approval of the Human Resources
Administrator, may require a current employee to undergo a medical and/or
psychological examination to determine fitness for continued employment under
the following conditions:
1. As may be necessary in order for the City to provide a reasonable
accommodation.
2. Following an injury or accident.
3. As otherwise permitted in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. An employee shall only be required to submit to an examination to confirm his or
her continued ability to perform the tasks required of their duty assignment. This
policy shall not be implemented to identify employees with disabilities or to
discriminate in any manner.
D. The Department provides access to a fitness facility at the City Center, which
includes aerobic and weigh equipment, available for use twenty-four-hours a day,
seven days a week. Employees are encouraged to use this facility and equipment
to aid in maintaining their physical fitness.
E. The City of Olivette offers all employees complimentary memberships to Five
Oaks on Warson (Olivette Community Center). Five Oaks on Warson features a
full range fitness center with gymnasium and additional opportunities for personal
training, group fitness classes, and sports leagues.

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD – 15.8
Page 3 of 5
V. ON-DUTY WORKOUT
Commissioned employees assigned to the Patrol Division will be permitted to exercise
on-duty for up to one hour during their shift. All other commissioned employees may
exercise on-duty for up to 40 minutes during their shift. This may occur at any time of
day or night with the following regulations:
A. Patrol Division employees may not begin their exercise period during the first
half hour of their shift and must conclude their exercise period prior to the last
half hour of their shift. Patrol Division employees shall only engage in an
exercise period when their shift is fully staffed. Only one employee from the
Patrol Division will be permitted to exercise at any given time to maintain
minimum staffing for patrol coverage.
B. Employees must obtain permission from their supervisor in charge prior to
engaging in an exercise period.
C. Patrol Division employees should remove themselves from service via
dispatch or self-dispatch in the Department’s CAD program.
D. Employees are required to monitor their portable radio for any radio traffic
that may concern them or prompt their immediate return to service.
E. The supervisor in charge may recall personnel back into service from an
exercise period when they deem it necessary. Employees must immediately
abandon their exercise period and return to service when ordered to do so.
F. Employees are permitted to utilize the work out facility located in the City
Center or Five Oaks on Warson, including afterhours access. All equipment
utilized during an exercise period will be done in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations and guidelines. Employees using the facility
after hours must return it to an acceptable condition for daily operation.
G. Time needed for changing in/out of uniform and showering is included in the
exercise period and shall not extend their exercise period. Employees shall be
fully dressed and prepared for duty at the conclusion of the exercise period.
H. Exercise on-duty is a privilege. Any employee who does not follow the policy
or is disciplined for other reasons may have the workout privilege rescinded.
I. If an employee sustains an injury during their exercise period, they must
immediately report the injury to their supervisor.
VI. SMOKING

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD – 15.8
Page 4 of 5
It is extremely important to establish reasonable limitations on smoking in the workplace
by striking a sensible balance between the health needs of all nonsmokers and the rights
of smokers. No smoking will be permitted in City of Olivette buildings or in any City
vehicle. Smoking is permitted outdoors only in designated smoking areas.
VII. PROHIBITION AGAINST ALCOHOL/ILLEGAL/UNAUTHORIZED DRUG USE
While on duty or while conducting City related business or other activities off premises,
while wearing clothing with the City’s name or logo, while driving a City owned or
leased vehicle, or while operating or using other City owned or leased property or
equipment, an employee may not use, possess, distribute, sell or be under the influence of
alcohol, inhalants, illegal drugs, including drugs which are legally obtainable but which
were not legally obtained, and prescribed or over the counter drugs which are not being
used as prescribed or as intended by the manufacturer.
The legal use of prescribed and over the counter drugs is permitted only if it does not
impair an employee’s ability to perform the essential functions of the job (or operate the
vehicle, property or other equipment) effectively and in a safe manner that does not
endanger the employee, citizens or other individuals in the workplace.
VIII. CRITICAL INCIDENT STRESS MANAGEMENT (CISM)
A. The Olivette Police Department understands that police officers can face
situations which can cause an emotional impact. These types of incidents can
create various negative stress responses. In some instances, the effects may be
devastating. As necessary, the Department will facilitate in providing confidential
Critical Incident Stress Defusing’s and/or Debriefings to personnel affected by a
critical incident.
B. All discussions between the participating affected personnel, CISM personnel,
chaplains, and supervisors will be held to the strictest confidence and subject to
the guidelines of this order and other policies regarding disciplinary procedures.
C. The Supervisor of the affected personnel shall contact the Chief of Police, or their
designate, who will assist in making the determination if a Defusing is needed
immediately (within 8 hours of critical incident). If Defusing is not recommended,
a determination will be made if Critical Incident Stress Debriefing is
recommended (within 96 hours, but 24 hours after, the conclusion of the critical
incident). Consultation with a CISM organization may be utilized to make these
determinations.
D. Critical Incident Defusing’s or Debriefing’s will be coordinated through the
Greater St. Louis Region CISM Association or other similar organization.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD – 15.8
Page 5 of 5
E. The attendance of personnel at a Critical Incident Stress Defusing or Debriefing
will be reasonably mandatory based on the collaborated decisions of the
Supervisors of the affected employee.
F. The affected personnel may be referred to the City of Olivette Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) for a counseling session with a specialist in post
critical incident counseling. This referral will be for support purposes, allowing
the employee to discuss any problems resulting from the incident. The contents of
this session will remain confidential. In exceptional circumstances, the employee
may be referred to a mental health professional in preference to the Employee
Assistance Program.
IX. MENTAL HEALTH CHECK-IN (RSMo 590.192)
A. All officers will participate in documented biannual training covering various
topics related to mental health instructed by a department approved provider.
Completion records will be maintained for each officer.
B. The Chief of Police may order additional department wide mandatory mental
health check-in’s, every 3-5 years, for commissioned Police personnel through the
city’s EAP or a designated treatment provider.
X. EMPLOYEE RESOURCES
A listing of available wellness resources is made available to all department employees
and is maintained in the Procedures section of PowerDMS.
XI. COMPLIANCE
Nothing in this Order shall attempt to supersede the Americans with Disabilities Act or
the Missouri Human Rights Act in requiring reasonable accommodations or allowing an
individual to be placed in an unsafe working condition due to an inability to perform the
essential functions of that position, which would not only endanger them but also fellow
officers and the public.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/18/2023
Revised: 9/6/2024
Revised: 11/21/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

