OPD - 16.1
Page 1 of 19
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
Index as:
Law Enforcement Code of Ethics
Primary Responsibilities of a Police Officer
Discretion
Response to Resistance or Aggression
Confidentiality
Integrity
Code of Conduct On Duty
Code of Conduct Off Duty
Standards of Performance
CODE OF CONDUCT
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish the Code of Ethics by which all sworn
officers of this Department must abide. The Code of Ethics is for internal use only and
does not enlarge an officer’s civil or criminal liability in any way. It should not be
construed as the creation of a higher standard of safety or care in any evidentiary sense
with respect to third party claims.
II. PRIMARY RESPONSIBILITIES OF A POLICE OFFICER:
A police officer acts as an official representative of government who is required and
trusted to work within the law. The officer’s powers and duties are conferred by statute.
The fundamental duties of a police officer include serving the community, safeguarding
lives and property, protecting the innocent, keeping the peace, and ensuring the rights of
all to liberty, equality and justice.

-- 1 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 2 of 19
III. PERFORMANCE OF THE DUTIES OF A POLICE OFFICER:
A. A police officer shall perform all duties impartially, without favor or affection or ill
will and without regard to status, sex, race, religion, political belief, or aspiration. All
citizens will be treated equally with courtesy, consideration, and dignity.
B. Officers will never allow personal feelings, animosities, or friendships to influence
official conduct. Laws will be enforced appropriately and courteously, and in carrying
out their responsibilities, officers will strive to obtain maximum cooperation from the
public. They will conduct themselves in appearance and deportment in such a manner as
to inspire confidence and respect for the position of public trust, which they hold.
C. Officers have a duty to intervene if they believe that a manifest injustice would result
from failure to take immediate action.
IV. DISCRETION:
A. A police officer will use responsibly the discretion vested in the position and exercise
it within the law. The principle of reasonableness will guide the officer’s determination
and the officer will consider all surrounding circumstances in determining whether any
legal action shall be taken.
B. Consistent and wise use of discretion, based on professional policing competence,
will do much to preserve good relationships and retain the confidence of the public.
There can be difficulty in choosing between conflicting courses of action. It is important
to remember that a timely word of advice rather than arrest, which may be correct in
appropriate circumstances, can be the more effective means of achieving a desired end.
V. RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION:
A. A police officer will never employ unnecessary response to resistance or aggression
or violence and will use only such response to resistance or aggression in the discharge of
duty as is reasonable in all circumstances.
B. The use of response to resistance or aggression should be used only with the greatest
restraint and only after discussion, negotiation, de-escalation and persuasion have been
found to be inappropriate or ineffective. While the response to resistance or aggression is
occasionally unavoidable, every police officer will refrain from applying the unnecessary
infliction of pain or suffering and will never engage in cruel, degrading, or inhumane
treatment of any person. Refer to the Response to Resistance or Aggression order for
further information.

-- 2 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 3 of 19
VI. CONFIDENTIALITY:
Whatever a police officer sees, hears, or learns of, which is of confidential nature, will be
kept secret unless the performance of duty or legal provision requires otherwise.
Members of the public have a right to security and privacy and information obtained
about them must not be improperly divulged.
VII. INTEGRITY:
A police officer will not engage in acts of corruption or bribery nor will an officer
condone such acts by other police officers. The public demands that the integrity of
police officers be above reproach. Police officers must, therefore, avoid any conduct that
might compromise integrity and thus undercut the public confidence in a law
enforcement agency. Officers will refuse to accept any gifts, presents, subscriptions,
favors, gratuities, or promises that could be interpreted as seeking to cause the officer to
refrain from performing official responsibilities honestly and within the law. Police
officers must not receive private or special advantage from their official status. Respect
from the public cannot be bought; it can only be earned and cultivated.
VIII. COOPERATION WITH OTHER POLICE OFFICERS AND AGENCIES:
Police officers will cooperate with all legally authorized agencies and their
representatives in the furtherance of law enforcement. An officer or agency may be one
among many organizations that provide law enforcement services to a jurisdiction. It is
imperative that police officers always assist colleagues fully and completely with respect
and consideration.
IX. PERSONAL AND PROFESSIONAL CAPABILITIES:
Police officers will be responsible for their own standard of professional performance and
will take every reasonable opportunity to enhance and improve their level of knowledge
and competence. Through study and experience, a police officer can acquire the high
level of knowledge and competence, which is essential for the efficient and effective
performance of duty. The acquisition of knowledge is a never-ending process of personal
and professional development that should be pursued constantly.
X. PRIVATE LIFE:
Police officers will behave in a manner that does not bring discredit to their agencies or
themselves. A police officer’s character and conduct while off duty must always be
exemplary, thus maintaining a position of respect in the community in which he/she lives
and serves. The officer’s personal behavior must be beyond reproach.
XI. KNOWLEDGE OF LAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS:

-- 3 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 4 of 19
A. All employees are presumed to have knowledge of the laws of the United States and
the State of Missouri, the ordinances of the City of Olivette, and the rules and regulations
of this Department.
B. In addition to the specific duties of each individual rank and position, the following
general duty provisions are applicable to all members of the Department and must be
observed:
1. All rules and regulations set forth in General Orders, Special Orders and all
amendments thereto must be obeyed.
2. Each employee shall properly inform himself/herself about all Orders,
regulations, and memorandums governing his/her duties.
3. Name, rank or position, DSN, and similar identifying information shall be
given in a civil manner to any person who may inquire.
4. Aid shall be promptly given to persons requesting service, in so far as is
consistent with duty obligations.
5. No police information, of any nature, shall be disclosed unless it is proper and
necessary under the circumstances.
6. Interfering with the course of justice in any fashion whatsoever is forbidden.
7. No advice or information shall be given to any arrested person or to others for
him/her, in relation to the defense or prosecution against him/her.
8. An employee shall not fail to notify his/her superior of information concerning
police matters that comes into his/her possession.
9. An officer shall remain neutral to both parties in any civil case or dispute and
shall act only to prevent breach of the peace or to suppress disturbance.
10. Every officer must assist and protect, and come to the aid of, other members
of the Department in need of aid or assistance.
11. Neglect of duty, improper performance of duty, sleeping or loafing while on
duty, are prohibited.
12. All employees will maintain expected standards of competent performance.
Those employees consistently performing below the expected standard are subject
to disciplinary action or non-disciplinary separation from service.
13. All employees shall maintain a courteous, professional demeanor at all times.

-- 4 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 5 of 19
XII. STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE:
A. The Police Department has the authority and responsibility to establish standards of
performance expected from all employees. All employees are expected and required to
consistently accomplish these standards. The Department recognizes that individual
differences, unique circumstances, and performance opportunities will create reasonable
variations in performance. However, if work conditions and circumstances are
reasonably comparable in nature, it is reasonable for the Department to expect similar
performance from employees performing these duties.
B. Employees that fail to perform adequately on any assigned task or consistently fail to
accomplish acceptable levels of performance for his/her position should expect to be
replaced, disciplined, or terminated.
C. All employees are expected to take affirmative steps to contact their superiors to
clarify an expected level of performance that they do not understand.
D. The Department will measure employee performance on the effective and efficient use
of their time.
XIII. LAW ENFORCEMENT CODE OF ETHICS:
The public confidence and trust placed upon those in the police service, including
commissioned officers and non-commissioned personnel, requires standards of conduct
higher than those expected of ordinary citizens. Conduct, on and off duty, must meet the
standards of professional employees. These standards are not promulgated as an
oppressive instrument of this Department or as a means of placing those in the police
service above the general citizenry, but they are established to maintain the respect for
laws and the democratic processes upon which this country was founded. This Order
shall provide this Department with standards of discipline, conduct, and ethical practice
by which all Department personnel will lead their professional and personal lives to
better serve and maintain the existing confidence of the citizens of the City of Olivette.
All law enforcement officers must be fully aware of the ethical responsibilities of their
position and must strive constantly to live up to the highest possible standards of
professional policing. All Olivette police officers shall abide by the following Code of
Ethics, as adopted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police with very minor
editorial changes:
As a law enforcement officer, my fundamental duty is to serve the community; to
safeguard lives and property; to protect the innocent against deception, the weak against
oppression or intimidation and the peaceful against violence or disorder; and to respect
the constitutional rights of all to liberty, equality and justice.
I will keep my private life unsullied as an example to all and will behave in a manner that
does not bring discredit to me or to my agency. I will maintain courageous calm in the
face of danger, scorn or ridicule; develop self-restraint; and be constantly mindful of the

-- 5 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 6 of 19
welfare of others. Honest in thought and deed both in my personal and official life, I will
be exemplary in obeying the law and the regulations of my department. Whatever I see or
hear of a confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity will be kept
ever secret unless revelation is necessary in the performance of my duty.
I will never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices, political beliefs,
aspirations, animosities or friendships to influence my decisions. With no compromise for
crime and with relentless prosecution of criminals, I will enforce the law courteously and
appropriately without fear or favor, malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary force
or violence.
I recognize the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I accept it as a public
trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of police service. I will never engage in
acts of corruption or bribery, nor will I condone such acts by other police officers. I will
cooperate with all legally authorized agencies and their representatives in the pursuit of
justice.
I know that I alone am responsible for my own standard of professional performance and
will take every reasonable opportunity to enhance and improve my level of knowledge
and competence.
I will constantly strive to achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating myself to my
chosen profession… law enforcement.

-- 6 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 7 of 19
Part I- General Provisions
ARTICLE 1: JURISDICTION
Any person who is a commissioned or non-commissioned employee of the
Department or is operationally attached to the Department and under its
supervision and control, shall be subject to the provisions of these Articles.
ARTICLE 2: PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE OF LAWS,
ORDINANCES ARTICLES AND ORDERS
Unless otherwise provided, all employees shall be presumed to have knowledge
of the laws of Missouri and the United States, all County and Municipal
ordinances, the provisions of these Articles of Conduct and Discipline and all
General Orders and Regulations of the Department, and it shall be no defense to
show a lack of knowledge thereof.
ARTICLE 3: EMPLOYEES CHARGED WITH A CRIMINAL OFFENSE
Any employee who is charged with the commission of any acts which are in
violation of laws of the United States, this or any other state, or of a St. Louis
County or Municipal ordinance.
3.1 Shall be suspended without pay if formally charged with the
commission of a felony or any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude; and
(a) If convicted thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an
offense under Article 10; or
(b) If such employee is tried and acquitted of such criminal
charge, or if the criminal charge is otherwise disposed of in
favor or the employee, such employee may be disciplined for
the act or acts forming the basis of such criminal charge, only
if such act or acts independently constitute a violation of any
Article continued herein; or
3.2 If such employee is charged with any crime other than a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and
(a) If convicted thereof, shall be deemed guilty of an offense
under Article 33; or
(b) If such employee is tried and acquitted of such charge, or if
the criminal charge is otherwise disposed of in favor of the
employee, such employee may be disciplined for the act or

-- 7 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 8 of 19
acts independently constitute a violation of any Article
contained herein.
3.3 The Chief of Police may suspend an employee with pay when:
(a) The employee is under investigation for a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude but not formally
charged; or
(b) The employee is charged with a crime other than a felony or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
(c) When the Chief determines a suspension with pay is
warranted pending the completion of an administrative
investigation for violation of any Article contained herein.
3.4 Each employee has a duty to immediately report to the Chief of
Police when
(a) The employee is arrested as a suspect in any offense in any
jurisdiction; or
(b) The employee becomes aware they are under investigation
for any offense in any jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 4: PUNISHMENTS
4.1 Any employee found guilty of any Article contained herein by the
Chief of Police shall be disciplined as deemed appropriate for the
offense and as directed by the Chief, except that any employee found
guilty of a violation of Article 10 shall be dismissed from the
Department. Formal Discipline-dismissal from the Department,
reduction in rank, suspension from duties without pay, and/or
mandatory remedial training provided by the Department; Summary
Discipline - written reprimand, verbal reprimand and/or remedial
training provided by the Department.
4.2 The effective date of execution of all disciplinary actions shall be the
date the disciplinary action is taken;
4.3 The Chief of Police may remit any unexecuted portion of any
disciplinary action taken at any time prior to its completion.

-- 8 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 9 of 19
ARTICLE 5: APPEALS
5.1 Any employee who has been disciplined for a violation of these
Articles may appeal such action to his/her immediate supervisor;
5.2 Any employee who appeals any disciplinary action pursuant to Article
5.1 shall file a notice of such appeal in writing to his/her immediate
supervisor within seven (7) days after the date of the execution of such
disciplinary action or shall be deemed to have waived such right of
appeal.
5.3 Any employee who is dissatisfied with the decision of his/her
supervisor may submit his/her grievance, in writing, to his/her
department head within five (5) working days after the initial decision.
The department head shall make a separate investigation and inform
the employee, in writing, of his/her decision and the reasons therefore,
within five (5) working days after receipt of the employee’s grievance.
An aggrieved employee shall have the right to by-pass Articles 5.1 and
5.2, as appropriate, if actions of the immediate supervisor and/or the
department head are the subject of the grievance. A department head
may by-pass Article 5.4 below if the grievance results from a decision
of the City Manager.
5.4 If the employee is dissatisfied with the department head’s decision,
he/she may obtain a review by the City Manager by submitting a
request, in writing, within five (5) working days following receipt of
the department head’s decision. The City Manager shall make such
investigation and conduct such hearings as he/she deems necessary.
The City Manager shall, within five (5) working days after receipt of
the employee’s request for review, inform the employee, in writing, of
his/her findings and decision.
5.5 The employee may, within ten (10) working days following receipt of
the City Manager’s decision, submit in writing to the City Manager a
notice of appeal to the Personnel Appeals Board.
5.6 The Personnel Appeals Board shall schedule a hearing no less than
seven (7) days and no more than fourteen (14) days after the filing of
the notice of appeal. At the hearing the employee may be represented
by counsel and may present evidence on his/her behalf. The City
Manager shall also have the right to be heard. The Personnel Appeals
Board shall have the right to require or, upon application of either
party to the proceedings, shall require the attendance of any City
employee or officer and shall have the right to order the production of
any City records relating to the to the appeal. All testimony presented
at the hearing shall be sworn, and rules of evidence shall be followed,

-- 9 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 10 of 19
as determined by the Personnel Appeals Board. All proceedings before
the Board shall be recorded. At the conclusion of the hearing and upon
consideration of the evidence before it, the Board shall file a written
statement of its findings and determination with the City Manager and
the appellant. Copies shall be delivered to each member of the
Council. All findings and determinations of the Board shall be made
upon the affirmative vote of three members and shall be final. Any
aggrieved party may petition for review by the St. Louis County
Circuit Court pursuant to Sections 536.100 through 536.140 of the
Revised Statutes of Missouri.

-- 10 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 11 of 19
PART II - Disciplinary Articles
Any employee shall be disciplined in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, if such
employee is guilty of:
ARTICLE 6: BEING A PRINCIPAL, that is,
Any employee who
6.1 Commits an offense disciplinable by these Articles;
6.2 Aids, abets, counsels, commands or procures its commission;
or
6.3 Causes an act to be done which, if directly performed by the
employee should be disciplinable by these Articles is a
principal.
ARTICLE 7: ATTEMPTING TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE, that is,
Commits an act, with specific intent to commit an offense under these
Articles, amounting to more than a mere preparation and tending, even
though failing, to affect its commission.
ARTICLE 8: BEING AN ACCESSORY AFTER THE FACT, that is,
Knowing that an offense punishable by these Articles has been committed,
receives, comforts or assists the offender in order to hinder or prevent any
investigation or disciplinary action for such offense.
8.1 Each employee having knowledge of an act punishable under
these Articles has the duty to report that knowledge to a
supervisory employee;
ARTICLE 9: CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT AN OFFENSE, that is,
Conspires with any other person to commit an offense under these
Articles, if one or more of the conspirators does an overt act which tends
to affect the object of the conspiracy.
ARTICLE 10: CONVICTION OF A FELONY OR A CRIME OF
MORAL TURPITUDE, that is,
Is convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

-- 11 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 12 of 19
ARTICLE 11: DISOBEDIENCE OF ORDERS, that is,
11.1 Violates or fails to obey any lawful Departmental General
Order or command. However, no employee is required to
obey an unlawful order, and no employee shall knowingly
issue any order that is in violation of any federal or state law,
County or Municipal ordinance or Departmental General
Order, Rule or Regulation. The responsibility to refuse to
obey an unlawful order rests with the receiving employee and
will require sufficient justification. Any employee receiving
an unlawful order has a duty to report such an order, in
writing, to the next higher authority through the appropriate
chain of command.
11.2 Having knowledge of, and a duty to obey, any lawful order
issued by a member of the Department, fails to obey the
order, including orders relayed by the same or lesser rank.
Employees who are given any instruction or order that
conflicts with any previously received instruction or order
shall call this fact to the attention of the person giving the
second order. If so directed, the second order shall be
obeyed. Any employee who countermands an existing order
or instruction shall be held accountable for that action.
ARTICLE 12: INSUBORDINATE CONDUCT, that is,
12.1 Willfully disobeys a lawful command of a supervisor; or
12.2 Treats with contempt or is disrespectful in language or
deportment toward a supervisory officer in the execution of
Departmental duties.
ARTICLE 13: MALTREATMENT OF SUBORDINATES, that is,
13.1 Oppresses, maltreats or is cruel toward any subordinate
employee; or
13.2 Treats with contempt or is abusive in language or deportment
toward any subordinate employee in the execution of
Departmental duties.

-- 12 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 13 of 19
ARTICLE 14: UNLAWFUL OR OPPRESSIVE EXERCISE OF
AUTHORITY, that is,
14.1 Knowingly, or through culpable neglect, arrest any person
unlawfully;
14.2 Knowingly, or through culpable neglect, conducts any
unlawful search of any person, automobile, house or other
property;
14.3 Uses excessive or unreasonable force or violence upon any
prisoner or other person with whom he may be brought into
contact in the actual or purported execution of police duties.
14.4 While in the actual purported execution of police duties,
treats with contempt or is abusive in language or deportment
toward any member of the public; or
14.5 While in the actual or purported execution of police duties,
Oppresses, maltreats or is cruel toward any member of the
public.
ARTICLE 15: FAILURE TO EXERCISE SUPERVISORY
RESPONSIBILITIES, that is,
Any employee supervising any other employee or persons subject to these
Articles, and willfully or through culpable neglect, fails to ensure
compliance by such subordinate with all federal and state laws, County
and municipal ordinances, the provisions of these Articles and all
Department orders, rules and regulations applicable to such subordinate.
ARTICLE 16: NEGLECT OF DUTY, that is,
16.1 Having knowledge that a crime has been committed, and
willfully or through neglect, fails to report such knowledge to
the proper authority or fails to take reasonable steps to
apprehend the offender;
16.2 Having knowledge that an offense against these Articles has
been committed by any person subject to these Articles, and
willfully or through neglect fails to report such to the proper
authorities;
16.3 Having knowledge of any material facts concerning any

-- 13 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 14 of 19
person charged with or suspected of a crime, and willfully or
through neglect fails to report such;
16.4 Without proper authority, fails to promptly deliver any
property or money taken or received by him/her in his/her
official capacity to the evidence custodian or other proper
official;
16.5 Fails to take appropriate action to protect life and property,
preserve the peace, prevent crime or otherwise enforce all
federal, state and local laws and ordinances, while on duty
and within the jurisdiction of the Olivette Department of
Police;
16.6 Fails to take appropriate police action toward aiding a fellow
employee exposed to danger or in a situation of imminent
danger; or
16.7 Is otherwise derelict in the performance of Departmental
duties.
ARTICLE 17: FALSE OFFICIAL STATEMENT, that is,
17.1 Knowingly signs any false, misleading or inaccurate police
report, record, return, regulation, order or other official
document; or
17.2 Knowingly makes any other false, misleading or inaccurate
official statement.
ARTICLE 18: ALTERING DEPARTMENT OR PUBLIC RECORDS,
that is,
Without proper authority, alters, conceals, removes, mutilates, obliterates
or destroys any public record or other record of the Department, or of
which the Department has possession.
ARTICLE 19: BREACH OF CONFIDENCE, that is,
19.1 Divulges, reveals or communicates in any manner whatever
any information concerning any matter of official interest to
the Department acquired or received and to be kept in a
confidential manner, to any person not authorized to acquire
or receive such information;

-- 14 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 15 of 19
19.2 Communicates in any manner, any information which might
assist persons guilty or suspected of criminal acts to escape
arrest or punishment or which may enable them to dispose or
secrete evidence of unlawful activity or money, merchandise
or other property unlawfully obtained.
19.3 Electronically records the conversation of another member
or the Department without that person's prior knowledge and
permission, unless done in conjunction with a sanctioned
investigation and advance authorization is given by the Chief.
ARTICLE 20: CORRUPT PRACTICES; that is,
20.1 Solicits, accepts or receives anything of value which
influences, or may tend to influence, any decision, act,
omission or use of discretion concerning any matter
incidental to or arising out of any business matter of the
Department;
20.2 Solicits, accepts or receives any gift, gratuity, loan, fee or
other thing of value as compensation for or in recognition of
employment with the Department services rendered as a part
of such employment, without the consent of the Chief of
Police;
20.3 Without proper authority, uses the authority and position as a
member of the Department for personal advantage or gain;
20.4 Without proper authority, uses any property, materials,
supplies or information from within the Department for
personal advantage or gain;
20.5 Without proper authority, causes a traffic citation or notice to
appear to be reduced, voided or stricken; or
20.6 Purchases, sells, trades, barters or otherwise exchanges
anything of value from or to any suspect, defendant or
prisoner involved in any case arising during and out of the
course of Department business, except as may be specifically
authorized by the Chief of Police.

-- 15 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 16 of 19
ARTICLE 21: A CONFLICT OF INTEREST, that is,
21.1 Transacts any Departmental business in behalf of the
Department with any person, partnership, corporation or
other business entity in which such employee is a police
officer, agent or member or in which such employee owns or
has a real, considerable, valuable or otherwise substantial
interest;
21.2 Enters into any private business transactions with any person,
partnership, corporation or other business entity which will
create, or tend to create a real, considerable or otherwise
substantial conflict with any Departmental duty, policy,
order, rule, regulation or interest.
22.3 Suggests, advises, recommends or otherwise counsels any
person, with whom contact occurs during or as a result of
performance of Department duties to retain, employ or hire
any attorney or bail bond broker, except members of
employee's immediate family; or
22.4 Becomes bound or obligated to any attorney, bail bond
broker or any other person, partnership, corporation or other
business entity which will create or tend to create a real,
considerable or otherwise substantial conflict with any
Departmental duty, policy, order, rule, regulation, or interest.
ARTICLE 22: ENTERING CERTAIN PREMISES, that is,
Knowingly enters or remains upon any premises which are being used for
illegal purposes, when such presence in or upon such premises is not
required in the execution of Departmental duties.
ARTICLE 23: IMPROPER USE OF INTOXICANTS, that is,
23.1 Consumes or possess any intoxicating beverages while on
duty or in uniform, unless such is part of a line of duty
assignment;
23.2 Consumes any intoxicating beverages while off duty, or as
part of a line of duty assignment, and becomes so intoxicated
as to be unable or unfit for regular performance of duties;

-- 16 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 17 of 19
23.3 Posses any marijuana or controlled substance unless such is a
part of a line of duty assignment or pursuant to a bona fide
medical prescription;
23.4 Uses or consumes any marijuana or controlled substances
unless pursuant to a bona fide medical prescription; or
23.5 Operates any motor vehicle while under the influence of any
intoxicating beverage, controlled substance or other drug.
ARTICLE 24: MALINGERING, that is,
For the purpose of avoiding work, duty or service
24.1 Feigns illness, physical disablement, mental lapse or
derangement; or
24.2 Intentionally inflicts self-injury.
ARTICLE 25: UNAUTHORIZED ABSENCE, that is,
Without proper authority, becomes absent from a place of duty at which
he or she is required to be or fails to go to an appointed place of duty at the
time prescribed.
ARTICLE 26: IMPROPER RELEASE OF PRISONER, that is,
26.1 Without proper authority, releases any prisoner in his/her
charge; or
26.2 Through neglect or design, allows any prisoner in his/her or
custody to escape.
ARTICLE 27: UNCLEAN OR IMPROPER UNIFORM, ARMS OR
ACCOUTREMENT, that is,
Appears for duty or in public with an unclean or improper uniform, arms
or accoutrement or fails to maintain such effects in a clean and operable
state, except that any employee whose effects (uniform, arms or
accoutrement) have become unclean, improper or inoperable during and as
a result of the performance of any Departmental duty, shall not be guilty
of a violation of this Article unless such employee has been afforded a
reasonable time and opportunity to restore such effects to proper
condition.

-- 17 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 18 of 19
ARTICLE 28: IMPROPER DISPOSITION OR DAMAGE OF
DEPARTMENTAL PROPERTY, that is,
Without proper authority
28.1 Sells or otherwise disposes of;
28.2 Willfully, or through neglect, damages, destroys or loses; or
28.3 Willfully, or through neglect suffers to be lost, damaged,
destroyed, sold or wrongfully disposed of; any property
belonging to the City of Olivette or in the possession
of the Department.
ARTICLE 29: IMPROPER APPOINTMENT, that is,
Procures employment with the Department by knowingly making false
representations of deliberately concealing any disqualifications for such
employment and receives pay of allowances hereunder.
ARTICLE 30: MISCONDUCT DURING PROMOTIONAL
PROCESS, that is,
30.1 Without proper authority, during any written examination
conducted as part of the promotional process, talks,
communicates or exchanges information with any other
person or carries into the examination area any notes, lists or
other materials;
30.2 During any phase of the promotional process, knowingly,
makes any false or misleading statements to any examiner; or
30.3 During any phase of the promotional process, knowingly
conceals any material facts from the promotional authorities.
ARTICLE 31: DISHONORABLE BUSINESS DEALINGS, that is,
31.1 Through fraud, deceit, willful evasion, bad faith or gross
indifference, fails to pay when due any debt concerning
which there is not genuine dispute as to legality or amount,
except that such employee shall be counseled concerning
such debt by his/her immediate or other supervisor and
afforded a reasonable opportunity to satisfy same before any
discipline may be imposed hereunder; or

-- 18 of 19 --

OPD - 16.1
Page 19 of 19
31.2 Engages in fraudulent, deceitful or dishonorable practices for
financial gain in any business activities, public or private.
ARTICLE 32: SOLICITING AN OFFENSE, that is,
Solicits or advises another or others to violate any provision of these
Articles.
ARTICLE 33: GENERAL ARTICLE, that is,
Commits any neglect or disorder, though not specifically mentioned
herein, which is to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the
Department, impairs the efficiency of the Department, is in violation of
any federal or state law, County of municipal ordinance, or is of a nature
to bring discredit upon the Department.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/2/2009
Revised: 2/22/2018
Revised: 2/24/2020
Revised: 6/10/2020
Revised: 11/22/2021
Revised: 11/13/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 19 of 19 --

