OPD – 16.3
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Sexual Harassment
Workplace Harassment
WORKPLACE HARASSMENT POLICY
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Order is to establish a Department policy that will foster a healthy
environment and to provide procedures for reporting, investigating and resolving
complaints of harassment, sexual or otherwise.
II. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department that all employees have the right to
work in an environment free of all forms of harassment. Harassment will not be tolerated
and necessary action will be taken to prevent and/or remedy any reported instances of
harassment, sexual or otherwise.
III. GENERAL
A. Prohibited Activity
1. No employee shall explicitly or implicitly ridicule, mock or belittle any
co-worker or member of the public.
2. No employee shall make offensive or derogatory comments based on race,
national origin, creed, color, disability, age, religion, gender, sexual orientation or
gender identity/expression, socio-economic status directly or indirectly to any co-
worker or member of the public.
3. No employee shall sexually harass any co-worker or member of the public. In the
workplace, sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, request
for sexual favors or physical or verbal conduct of a sexual nature when:
a. submission to such conduct is made directly or indirectly as a
term or condition of employment.

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD – 16.3
Page 2 of 3
b. submission to or rejection of such conduct by an employee is used as
the basis for employment or promotional decisions effecting the
employee.
c. such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an employee’s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
4. There shall be no retaliation against any employee for filing a harassment
complaint or assisting, testifying or participating in the investigation of such a
complaint.
B. Employee’s Responsibilities
1. Employees encountering harassment should tell the person that their actions
are unwelcome and offensive, although such action is not mandatory.
Documentation of the incident is recommended.
2. Any employee who has been harassed should report the incident(s) to their
immediate supervisor as soon as possible to prevent further harassment and
expedite an appropriate investigation. If this is not possible, the incident may
be reported to their next highest-level supervisor.
C. Supervisor’s Responsibilities
1. Each supervisor shall assume responsibility for preventing acts of harassment
by:
a. advising their employees of what constitutes harassment and the
procedures for reporting and resolving such problems.
b. monitoring the work unit for signs of harassment and taking
appropriate steps to intervene and resolve the problem.
c. limiting the work contact between employees where there has been a
complaint of harassment, pending investigation.
2. Each supervisor shall assist any employee within the Department that comes
to them with a complaint of harassment.
3. Command and supervisory personnel at all levels shall not be permitted to
date subordinates.

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD – 16.3
Page 3 of 3
D. A file of harassment complaints shall be maintained in a secure location. This General
Order does not preclude any employee from filing a complaint or grievance with the
appropriate outside agency.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/19/2009
Revised: 7/8/2020
Revised: 11/13/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

