OPD - 18.1
Page 1 of 10
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Communicable Diseases
Personal Protective Equipment
PPE
Holdover Cell Contamination
Property Contamination
Line-of-Duty Exposure
Confidentiality of Information
Infectious Disease Training
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
I. PURPOSE
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for handling persons
with communicable diseases or material that has been contaminated.
B. It is the policy of this Department to provide a procedure to assist employees in
minimizing their risk for exposure, provide appropriate protective equipment, provide
appropriate preventive education, and establish a course of action should an exposure
occur, without sacrificing essential services to the community or individual citizens.
C. Employees are always responsible for treating people fairly and humanely. When
handling or assisting persons with medical afflictions, employees bear the additional
responsibility of being especially sensitive towards the person’s medical condition and to
treat the person with the same dignity reserved for all people with whom we have contact.
II. DEFINITIONS
A. BLOOD – means human blood, human blood components, and products made from
human blood.

-- 1 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 2 of 10
B. BLOOD-BORNE PATHOGENS – Disease-causing microorganisms or viruses found
in human blood including, but not limited to, HIV and HBV.
C. AIRBORNE DISEASE - any disease that is caused by pathogens that can be
transmitted through the air by both small, dry particles, and as larger liquid droplets. The
relevant pathogens may be viruses, bacteria, or fungi, and they may be spread through
breathing, talking, coughing, sneezing, raising of dust, spraying of liquids, toilet flushing
or any activities which generates aerosol particles or droplets.
D. AIRBORNE TRANSMISSION - The passing of a pathogen causing communicable
disease from an infected host individual or group to a particular individual or group,
regardless of whether the other individual was previously infected. Many common
infections can spread by airborne transmission at, including: Anthrax (inhalational),
Chickenpox, Influenza, Measles, Smallpox, Coronaviruses, Cryptococcosis and
Tuberculosis.
E. CONTAMINATED – means the presence or the reasonably anticipated presence of
blood or other potentially infectious materials on an item or surface.
F. DECONTAMINATION – the use of physical or chemical means to remove,
inactivate, or destroy blood borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they
are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is
rendered safe for handling, use, or disposal.
G. HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
H. HBV – Hepatitis B Virus
I. POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIAL – means urine, feces, blood, semen,
vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid,
peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva containing blood, any body fluid that is visibly
contaminated with blood, all body fluids in situations where it is difficult or impossible to
differentiate between body fluids, and any unfixed tissue or organ [other than intact skin]
from a human being [living or dead].
J. PARENTERAL – means piercing mucous membranes or the skin barrier through such
events as needle sticks, human bites, cuts, and abrasions.
K. PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – Includes, but is not limited to, latex or
equivalent gloves, clear plastic safety glasses, face masks, and boot/shoe coverings.
L. UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS – is an approach to infection control. According to
the concept of Universal Precautions, all human blood and certain human body fluids are
treated as if known to be infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood-borne or airborne
pathogens.

-- 2 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 3 of 10
III. PROCEDURES
A. General Precautions
1. Universal Precautions shall be observed to prevent contact with body fluids or
other potentially infectious materials. All human body fluids and other potentially
infectious materials shall be treated as if known to be infectious for HIV, HBV, or
other diseases.
2. Employees have a responsibility to take all precautions necessary to maintain
their own health and safety. Employees shall be familiar with the Personal
Protective Equipment that is available and shall utilize such equipment as needed.
3. Eating, drinking, smoking, handling contact lenses, or applying cosmetics or lip
balm is prohibited at scenes where the potential for exposure to blood-borne or
airborne pathogens or other infectious materials exists.
B. Personal Protective Equipment:
Personal Protective Equipment provides a barrier designed to protect the employee from
contact with body fluids or other potentially infectious materials. Gloves (i.e. Nitrile,
Latex, etc.) shall be worn any time there is the possibility of contact with potentially
infectious material. Additionally, the employee has available coveralls, safety glasses,
mask, and boot/shoe cover for more severe incidents to be used at their discretion. These
precautions conform to Level C of OSHA standards.
C. Supplies:
1. The Chief shall ensure that adequate supplies are available for communicable
disease control.
2. The Chief or his/her designee will be responsible for the inventory of supplies
for communicable disease control and will also initiate re-ordering procedures
before supplies become depleted. Shift Commanders are responsible for ensuring
dissemination of these supplies to all personnel.
3. Officers using supplies stored in Department first aid kits are responsible for
reporting their use to their supervisor and replacing them. Supervisors will be
notified via Departmental Form #OPD – F1104, “First Aid Kit Usage”, on the
same day of use. Vehicle supplies will include:
a. Disposable gloves,
b. Disposable masks,
c. Safety glasses,

-- 3 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 4 of 10
d. Boot/shoe covers,
e. Instant hand sanitizer,
f. Sealable “Biohazard” bags,
h. Spit Hood
4. Supplies available to officers handling arrestees in the police station will
include:
a. Disposable gloves,
b. Disposable masks,
c. Safety glasses,
d. Boot/shoe covers,
e. Sealable “Biohazard” bags,
f. Liquid germicidal cleaner,
g. Instant hand sanitizer,
i. Spit Hood
IV. CUSTODY PROCEDURES
A. Since medical history and/or examination cannot reliably identify all persons, infected
with HIV, other blood-borne or airborne pathogens, or other communicable diseases,
blood and body fluid precautions shall be consistently used. This approach is
recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and is known as Universal Precautions.
B. Disposable gloves shall be worn whenever handling any persons, clothing, or
equipment with bodily fluids on them.
C. Extreme caution is to be used during the search of homes, vehicles, and persons of
suspected drug users. This will help prevent accidental skin punctures. Extreme caution
must also be used when reaching into areas that are not visible such as pockets, waist
bands, shoes, etc.
D. After the completion of a task or search where disposable gloves were used, and there
is a possible exposure to potentially infectious material, they are to be removed with
caution, placed in a “Biohazard” bag and securely sealed. The officer shall then place the

-- 4 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 5 of 10
sealed bag into a designated “Contaminated Item” receptacle located in the Fire
Department.
E. Whenever it is necessary to transport a subject who has blood or bodily fluids present
on his person or clothing, makes a voluntary statement that he/she has a communicable
disease, or is exhibiting signs/symptoms of a communicable disease, the supervisor shall
be notified. During transport, officers shall don appropriate PPE and place a PPE mask
on the subject.
F. Subjects who are actively spitting on/at or threatening to spit on/at an officer(s) or who
are spitting inside a Department vehicle shall have a Department-issued spit hood
properly placed over their head. If necessary, an ambulance should be summoned to
transport the subject to a health care facility.
G. Subjects with blood or bodily fluids present on their persons or who are exhibiting
signs/symptoms of any communicable disease (i.e. flu-like symptoms) should be
transported separately from other subjects.
H. Officers have an obligation to inform other support personnel (fire fighters,
paramedics, etc.) whenever change or transfer of custody occurs and the subject has
blood or bodily fluids present on his/her person, if the subject has made a voluntary
statement that he/she has a communicable disease or is exhibiting signs/symptoms of a
communicable disease.
I. Subjects taken into custody with blood or bodily fluids on their person, who have made
a voluntary statement that he/she has a communicable disease, or who are exhibiting
signs/symptoms of a communicable disease shall be taken directly to and placed in a
designated holding cell for processing. An “Isolated Area—Do Not Enter” sign shall be
posted.
J. Officers are to indicate on the appropriate arrest forms when a subject taken into
custody makes a voluntary statement that he/she has a communicable disease or is
exhibiting signs/symptoms of a communicable disease.
K. Officers responding to a call where a complainant is alleging that he/she has been
intentionally infected with a communicable disease shall request a supervisor to respond
to the scene.
V. VEHICLE & EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE
A. Disinfection procedures shall be initiated as soon as practical when a police vehicle
requires decontamination after blood or other bodily fluid discharges or transporting a
subject who makes a voluntary statement that he/she has a communicable disease or is
exhibiting signs/symptoms of a communicable disease.
B. A supervisor will be notified to oversee the decontamination of the vehicle.

-- 5 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 6 of 10
C. Police personnel will implement disinfection procedures where appropriate.
D. Recommended disinfection procedures are as follows:
1. Affected vehicles shall be designated by the posting of an “Infectious Disease
Contamination” sign while awaiting disinfection.
2. Protective disposable gloves, safety glasses, and a mask will be worn during all
phases of disinfection. Personnel are to make certain the gloves are not torn
before they attempt to begin any phase of the disinfection process.
3. Officers shall remove any excess body fluids from the vehicle with an
absorbent cloth, paying special attention to any cracks, crevices or seams that may
be holding excess fluid.
4. A broad-spectrum activity virucidal-germicidal solution, such as one-part
household bleach to ten parts water shall be prepared according to the prescribed
standard. The affected area shall be cleansed with the virucidal-germicidal
solution and allowed to air dry for ten (10) minutes with all vehicle doors open.
5. All disposable contaminated cleaning items shall be placed in “Biohazard” bags
and placed in the designated “Contaminated Item” receptacle located in the Fire
Department.
6. If the clear plastic safety glasses provided in Department first aid kits are
possibly exposed to potentially infectious material, they will be disinfected as
described in Section V, D, 4 above.
VI. HOLDOVER CELL CONTAMINATION
A. Disinfection procedures shall be initiated as soon as practical when a holding cell
requires decontamination after blood or other bodily fluid discharges or after holding a
subject who makes a voluntary statement that he/she has a communicable disease or is
exhibiting signs/symptoms of a communicable disease.
A. An “Isolated Area—Do Not Enter” sign shall be posted on the cell.
B. The supervisor will be responsible for ensuring that the cell will be properly
disinfected or sealed off.
C. Recommended disinfection procedures to be followed are the same as for vehicle
maintenance procedures explained above.

-- 6 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 7 of 10
VII. HANDLING AND STORAGE OF PROPERTY AND EVIDENCE
A. Evidence containing suspected blood or other bodily fluids is to be handled with
gloves. If the stain or sample is dry, it shall be placed in a paper bag. A proper evidence
tag, evidence processing request, and a “Biohazard” label are to be affixed to the outside
of the package. If the evidence consists of a syringe and needle, it will be placed in an
evidence tube or sharps shuttle. The needle/syringe is to be placed in a proper container
so that persons handling the evidence can see it. The evidence envelope will be tagged
with an evidence tag, a processing request, and a “Biohazard” label. It should be noted
that if the needle/syringe is to be processed for latent fingerprints, the plastic bag might
hinder this activity. Remember, the safety of all personnel is of utmost importance.
Liquid samples either should be collected as liquid and stored in a bottle, or, if located on
clothing or similar materials, should be air-dried and packaged as described above.
B. Always wash thoroughly with soap and water after handling any item suspected of
being contaminated with blood or other bodily fluids. Wash even if you have worn
gloves.
C. Persons working in areas for extended periods of time where blood or other bodily
fluids have been shed (for example, crime scene personnel working for protracted periods
of time at homicide scenes) are to wear anti-contamination clothing such as suits, masks,
boot covers, and gloves.
D. Evidence personnel will adhere to a precise regimen when handling, processing, and
storing potentially infectious disease-contaminated evidence/property.
E. Any clothing or evidence known to be contaminated with suspected biohazard, HIV,
Hepatitis B, or other communicable diseases will be placed in a specified area and clearly
labeled. The label will indicate “Known HIV,” “Possible Hepatitis B,” etc.
F. All bloody clothing or evidence will be treated as if it is contaminated.
G. All bloody clothing or evidence, and sacks containing the clothing or evidence, will be
handled with protective disposable gloves.
I. Any clothing known or suspected to be contaminated with any communicable disease,
bloody or not, will be handled by evidence personnel only after those persons are wearing
protective disposable gloves.
J. Employees shall wash their hands thoroughly with germicidal soap after handling any
possible contaminated clothing or evidence.
K. All property for disposal will be disposed of in accordance with established
procedures for this type waste.
VIII. LINE-OF-DUTY EXPOSURE

-- 7 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 8 of 10
A. In case of a high-risk exposure, the officer shall notify their supervisor immediately
and respond to the City’s designated Worker’s Compensation medical provider. The
effectiveness of treatment is reduced after two hours and becomes almost ineffective after
24 hours.
B. An attempt should be made to obtain consent from the subject to be tested for
communicable disease at the City’s expense. If the subject refuses consent, such refusal
shall be documented in the original report.
C. If facts exist which would indicate that the source subject is HIV positive, such as
statements made by that subject or a family member, and consent for HIV testing is
refused, a search warrant should be executed upon the individual to obtain a blood
sample for HIV testing.
D. Examples of high-risk exposure are:
1. The handling of bloody or wet items, where scratches, cuts or open sores are
noticed on the area of contact.
2. Direct contact with bodily fluids from a subject on an area where there is an
open sore or cut.
3. Direct mouth-to-mouth resuscitation (CPR).
4. The receiving of a cut or puncture wound as a result of searching or arresting a
subject.
E. In case of a low-risk exposure, or if the degree of exposure is unknown, the officer
shall notify their supervisor as soon as practical. The officer may respond to the City’s
designated Worker’s Compensation medical provider for evaluation if s/he so desires.
F. In all cases of high-risk and low-risk exposure the officer’s supervisor shall complete a
Report of Injury Form #WC-1-EDI and a memorandum. These will be forwarded
through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.
G. Cleaning of Police Uniforms
1. The normal dry-cleaning process will effectively decontaminate clothing, as the
heat and solvents used will destroy pathogens. In cases of gross contamination, it
is preferable that as much of the material as possible be removed prior to the dry
cleaning. The contaminated clothing should be bagged, and the dry cleaner
informed of the material on the clothing.
2. Synthetic leather belts and accessories may be decontaminated with an
appropriate disinfectant, or with a solution of fifty parts water and one-part

-- 8 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 9 of 10
bleach. Genuine leather belts, gloves, and accessories cannot be effectively
decontaminated and should be disposed of as contaminated waste in the
Contaminated Item receptacle located in the Fire Department.
3. Officers will direct a memorandum through the chain of command to the
Deputy Chief for replacement of Department issued items. Personal property will
be replaced at the officer’s expense. The memo should include the circumstances
by which the property became contaminated.
H. Laundering or Dry Cleaning
1. Wear gloves when handling contaminated items.
2. Use a solution of 3% hydrogen peroxide to remove blood stains from clothing.
Soaking the contaminated clothing in such a solution for a few minutes readily
removes stains.
3. Launder washable clothing in a washing machine using hot temperature
settings and regular detergent. As a precaution, contaminated clothing should not
be laundered with other clothing.
IX. RECORD KEEPING/CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION:
A. Employees must balance the need of fellow members to have knowledge of
individuals known to be infected with communicable diseases and the right to privacy of
the infected person. Accordingly, the following procedures will be followed:
1. Under no circumstances shall specific information concerning communicable
diseases be broadcast on the police radio. If the dispatcher has information that
the subject is infected (i.e. arrest records), h/she will alert the responding
officer(s) of a possible dangerous disease type call.
2. If the officer discovers such a situation subsequent to arrival at a scene, he shall
likewise indicate to the dispatcher that he is involved with a dangerous disease
type call.
3. Arrest records shall indicate the presence of a dangerous disease.
4. All employees are cautioned that any information concerning communicable
disease is confidential. Public disclosure shall only be made in the following
circumstances:
a. Public employees of other agencies, departments, or political
subdivisions who need to know to perform their public duties.

-- 9 of 10 --

OPD - 18.1
Page 10 of 10
b. Peace officers, as defined in section 590.010 RSMo, the Attorney
General or any assistant attorneys general acting on his/her behalf, as
defined in chapter 27 RSMo, and prosecuting attorneys as defined in
chapter 56 RSMo, and pursuant to a court order as provided in section
191.657 RSMo.
c. Health care personnel working directly with the infected individual who
have a reasonable need to know for the purpose of providing direct patient
health care.
d. The victim of any sexual offense defined in chapter 566 RSMo, which
includes sexual intercourse as an element of the crime.
e. Other persons pursuant to written authorization of the subject of the test
results or information.
X. INFECTIOUS DISEASE TRAINING:
A. The Deputy Chief shall be responsible for disseminating updated information
concerning infectious diseases and coordinating additional in-service training dealing
with this subject material.
B. New employees shall receive initial training concerning infectious diseases. All
employees shall receive infectious disease training on a biennial basis.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/29/2010
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 2/17/2012
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 3/13/2018
Revised: 3/11/2020
Revised: 8/27/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 10 of 10 --

