OPD - 19.3
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Department Vehicle Accidents
DEPARTMENT VEHICLE ACCIDENTS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish the policy and procedures for reporting
and investigating accidents involving Department vehicles
II. GENERAL:
A. A Department vehicle accident is defined as an incident involving a vehicle owned,
leased or rented by the Olivette Police Department that results in personal injury and/or
property damage attributable directly or indirectly to the motion of a vehicle or its load.
B. Prior to using a Department vehicle, the operator/employee shall conduct an
inspection of the vehicle and an inventory of the assigned equipment. Vehicle damage or
missing/damaged equipment will be reported to the Shift Commander via an Inter-Office
Memorandum through the chain of command to the Chief of Police
C. A Department employee shall not give an oral or written statement regarding a
Department vehicle accident to anyone other than the investigating officer(s), the City
Attorney or the St. Louis Area Insurance Trust representative. Oral or written statements,
other than those to appropriate City officials, that become necessary, will first be
coordinated through the Chief of Police.
III. PROCEDURES FOR ACCIDENTS OCCURRING WITHIN OLIVETTE:
A. A police report is required any time a police vehicle is involved in any accident, in or
out of the City. Accidents occurring in the City may be written by an Olivette Officer not
involved in the accident at the discretion of the watch commander. When possible, all
injury accidents will be written by an outside agency.
B. When a Department vehicle accident is reported on a Missouri Uniform Accident
Report, the following will apply:
1. Police vehicle number shall be placed in the box marked “owner” (e.g., “Olivette
Police Vehicle 6403”).

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 19.3
Page 2 of 3
2. Address of driver shall be the physical location of the Olivette Police Department.
3. Phone number of the driver shall be the main dispatch phone number.
IV. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OPERATOR:
Immediately request ECDC to dispatch the shift commander to the accident scene. If
anyone involved in the accident requires medical attention, also request appropriate units.
V. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTIGATING AND/OR IMMEDIATE
SUPERVISOR:
A. Respond to the accident scene and ensure that the proper reporting procedures are
initiated.
B. Photograph the scene.
C. Ensure the appropriate notification of the accident is made to the Chief of Police.
D. Complete an inter-office memo detailing the accident and forward it through the
chain of command to the Chief of Police.
VI. RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPUTY CHIEF
A. Review for completeness and accuracy the Missouri Uniform Accident Report and
the shift commander’s inter-office memo.
B. Within two (2) working days of the accident, forward a copy of the completed
Missouri Uniform Accident Report and Automobile Loss Notice to the City Manager,
Chief of Police and Human Resource personnel.
C. Prepare and forward to the Chief of Police an Department memorandum that contains
a classification of the accident using the following definitions:
1. Preventable: An accident in which the driver of the Department vehicle could
have prevented the accident in some way by defensive driving techniques or
maneuvers. The driver did not do everything reasonably expected to prevent the
accident.
2. Non-Preventable: An accident in which the driver of the Department vehicle
could not have prevented the accident. The driver did everything reasonably
expected to avoid or prevent the accident.
D. When an accident has been classified as preventable, the Deputy Chief will
recommend disciplinary action based on the severity of the accident and the officer’s past
driving history. At a minimum, all preventable collisions must include a written

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 19.3
Page 3 of 3
coaching entry in Guardian Tracking. A written reprimand, at a minimum, must be
included with the third preventable collision and beyond within three (3) years.
VII. PROCEDURE FOR ACCIDENTS OCCURRING OUTSIDE OF OLIVETTE:
A. The operator will immediately request the appropriate law enforcement agency to
respond to the scene to complete an official report of the accident. The operator will
comply with all legal requirements of the venue. A request to forward a copy of the
report to the operator’s immediate supervisor will be made.
B. The police dispatcher will notify the Shift Commander as soon as possible, who will
ensure that the appropriate reporting procedures of this Order are completed.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 1/7/2011
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/10/2020
Revised: 11/22/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

