OPD - 19.7
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Mobile Video Equipment
MOBILE DIGITAL VIDEO RECORDING EQUIPMENT
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to provide guidelines for the use, management,
storage, and retrieval of audio-visual media recorded by in-car video systems.
II. POLICY:
Video recording equipment has been demonstrated to be of value in the prosecution of
traffic violations and related offenses, in evaluating officer performance, training, and as
defenses against false or inaccurate accusations against police officers. In order to
maximize the utility of this equipment in these and related areas, officers shall follow the
procedures for video equipment set forth in this policy.
III. PROCEDURES:
A. Program Objectives – This Department has adopted the use of in-car video/audio
recording systems in order to accomplish several objectives, including:
1. Accurate documentation of events, actions, conditions, and statements made
during arrests and critical incidents, to enhance officer reports, collection of
evidence and testimony in court; and
2. The enhancement of this Department’s ability to review probable cause for
arrest, arrest procedures, officer and suspect interaction, and evidence for
investigative purpose, as well as for officer evaluation and training.
B. Operating Procedures – Officers shall adhere to the following procedures when
utilizing video recording equipment:
1. Officers will not use the Digital Video Recording (DVR) equipment until they
have been trained on its use.
2. Prior to each shift, officers shall inspect their assigned vehicle’s DVR
equipment for satisfactory operation. They shall notify the shift commander of

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 19.7
Page 2 of 6
deficiencies immediately and that vehicle will be “dead lined” unless no other
patrol vehicles are available. Any malfunctions will be noted on Departmental
form OPD-F1014 “Car Camera Malfunction”. This form will be forwarded to the
Bureau of Investigations. Officers shall not attempt any repairs on any
malfunctioning equipment.
3. DVR recordings containing information that may be of value for case
prosecution or in any criminal or civil adversarial proceeding shall be safeguarded
as other forms of evidence.
4. DVR recordings will not be released outside the Department without prior
approval of the Chief of Police.
5. When an officer needs a certain video for evidence purposes, they shall
download the video to the appropriate CARE scanned folder.
6. Recordings that are preserved as evidence will be released for court only after
copies are made. Extracted video must be retained until administrative/judicial
proceedings are complete. This retention does not apply to interrogation videos
which are by their nature evidentiary and should be part of the investigative files.
7. Per the Missouri Secretary of State’s Police Clerk’s Retention Schedule, mobile
video recording will be retained for a minimum of 30 days. However, this
Agency reserves the right to assign a longer retention period to certain video file
categories. Files that have not been flagged will be automatically purged from the
system accordingly.
8. Use of the DVR system (i.e. recording, searching, viewing, etc. of video files),
as with all Department video surveillance systems, is strictly limited to official
law enforcement duties only. Misuse or unauthorized use of Department video
systems will result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of
employment.
C. Operation of Equipment:
1. The recorder is activated by any of these methods:
a. Activating the emergency lights,
b. Pressing the record button,
d. The patrol vehicle reaches a speed of 80 MPH, or
e. The patrol vehicle is involved in a collision.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 19.7
Page 3 of 6
2. Powering the system on/off will be accomplished automatically by turning the
vehicle’s ignition on and off.
3. The in-car video system will be left in record mode during traffic stops, and
other enforcement activities. Where possible the officer should use the equipment
to record other interactions with citizens or suspects that could prove useful in
court or to later justify an officer’s actions. Examples - sobriety checks, arrests,
consent to search, seizure of contraband, etc.
4. Recording will only be stopped after the traffic stop, or other enforcement
activity is terminated, and the traffic violator or subject(s) of the enforcement
action has left the scene. If a traffic stop or enforcement action occurs roadside,
recording will not be stopped until the police vehicle has moved back into the
normal flow of traffic.
5. If an officer is transporting a subject in the caged area of the car, the rear facing
camera shall be in record mode and must be included in the uploaded file.
6. All new officers will be trained in the proper use of the DVR by their Field
Training Officer (FTO).
D. Operational Protocol:
1. Prior to each shift, officers will sign into the in-car camera system of the patrol
vehicle that they will be utilizing during their shift and ensure that the camera is
positioned and adjusted to record events.
2. Except for police radios, officers shall ensure that the volume from the vehicle
radio does not interfere with the recording.
3. All on-scene officers, whether primary or assisting, shall ensure that their body
camera is activated to provide narration with the video recording.
4. Immediately after any recording has been stopped, or as soon as practicable,
officers will select an Event Category that best suits the reason for that recording.
Officers may also enter the CAD or Report Number if available at that time.
5. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recorded sequences
that may be of value for training purposes, and to tag those videos for
preservation.
6. Recording equipment will not be turned off during emergency driving under
any circumstances.
E. Media Duplication:

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 19.7
Page 4 of 6
1. All recorded media (both audio and video) associated with the in-car DVR are
the property of this Department. Dissemination outside of this agency is strictly
prohibited without the specific written authorization of the Chief of Police or his
designee.
IV. SUPERVISORY RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Supervisory personnel who manage officers equipped with video recording equipment
shall ensure:
1. All officers follow established procedures for the use and maintenance of the
DVR and the completion of recording documentation.
2. Prompt reporting of damaged or non-functional DVR equipment to the
appropriate Commander.
3. Officers protect the integrity of each DVR recording as if it will be scrutinized
by a court of law.
B. Upon receipt of a complaint concerning an officer of this Agency, information about
an incident of potential liability to the Department, or any other critical incident,
supervisors should determine if the incident is recorded and, if so, add a category to the
video to “Do Not Purge.” The supervisor will forward an email through the chain of
command to the Chief of Police documenting the specifics of the complaint or incident.
C. At least monthly, Patrol Commanders will review at least one (1) randomly chosen
citizen contact video of each patrol officer under their command. The purpose of this
review is to assist with the periodic assessment of officer performance, identify material
that may be appropriate for training and determine whether the mobile video equipment
is being fully and properly used. An email will be sent to the Bureau of Support Services
Commander with the results of the review.
D. Supervisors may randomly review recordings, checking appropriate demeanor and
actions of officers.
V. ACCESSING DIGITAL EVIDENCE
A. Employees who have been granted permission by the Chief of Police may review
digital evidence.
B. Employees will be assigned a unique identifier to access digital evidence from the
storage location.
C. With approval of the shift supervisor, employees may review the recordings of other
employees.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 19.7
Page 5 of 6
VI. REVIWING DIGITAL EVIDENCE
A. Officers may review their own recordings.
B. Detectives are responsible for reviewing, updating and tracking digital evidence
associated with their assigned cases.
C. If an officer is subject to an administrative or criminal investigation, the Chief of
Police reserves the right to limit or restrict an officer from viewing a recording. The
restriction can be imposed at any time, including prior to the Officer making statements
because of the investigation.
D. Digital evidence captured by an in-car video system is not all inclusive. The system
captures a less broad and less detailed image than the totality of the human senses. An
officer’s recollection of specific details may be different than what is captured in digital
evidence. Officers should review digital evidence prior to completing reports, when
necessary, to ensure accuracy. Officers shall review digital evidence prior to providing
testimony at hearings, trials, or depositions.
E. Digital evidence may be viewed for administrative purposes. The following is not an
exhaustive list of reasons digital evidence may be reviewed:
1. Any incident in which a member of the Department is injured or killed during
the performance of their duties.
2. Any incident involving the response to resistance or aggression by a member of
the Department.
3. Any in-custody death.
4. Any police pursuit and/or deployment of tire-deflation device.
5. When any member of the Department intentionally or unintentionally
discharges a lethal or less-than-lethal weapon at a person regardless of whether an
individual is struck.
6. Officer-involved traffic collisions.
7. Prior to the release of recordings in response to a proper legal request.
8. In preparation for a civil deposition or responding to an interrogatory where
the incident arises from the employee’s official duties.
9. For investigations undertaken by the Department regarding specific integrity,
administrative, or criminal allegations. In these situations, only digital evidence
relevant to the investigation scope shall be viewed and retained by investigators.

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 19.7
Page 6 of 6
Information relevant to the recordings viewed and seized as evidence by
investigators shall be documented as part of the chronological summary of any
investigation.
10. In situations where there is a need to review digital evidence not covered by
this procedure, a Command Officer must approve the request. Each situation will
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
VII. ANNUAL REVIEW
A. The Support Services Commander will conduct a documented annual administrative
review of the in-car and body-worn camera program to assess that the General Orders,
training requirements, operational procedures and agency equipment, are consistent with
the agency’s mission, vision, and values. The results of the review will be forwarded to
the Chief of Police.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/05/2009
Revised: 7/1/2015
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 3/21/2018
Revised: 8/13/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 1/14/2020
Revised: 3/11/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 9/9/2024
Revised: 4/14/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

