OPD – 19.9
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Bicycle
All-terrain/Utility Vehicle
UTV
________________________________________________________________________
SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLES
I. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to establish guidelines for the operation of all
types of “special purpose” vehicles utilized by the Department. Special purpose vehicles are to
be used to perform certain functions and accomplish specific tasks. Special purpose vehicles can
be an important tool in reducing criminal activity and increasing positive community relations by
allowing increased visibility and accessibility to the citizens and business community. Enhanced
patrol procedures and improved public relations are goals when using special purpose vehicles.
All Police Department personnel who operate a special purpose vehicle shall do so in accordance
with all state and local laws and ordinances and shall be subject to the duties applicable to
operators of any vehicle.
II. DEFINITION
A. SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE – A City owned vehicle, other than an administrative or
regular marked/unmarked patrol vehicle, that is used for specialized operations. Department
special purpose vehicles include bicycles (including electric bicycles) and all-terrain/utility
vehicles (UTV).
II. PROCEDURE
A. As weather, manpower, and circumstance permits, special purpose vehicles may be utilized
for, but not limited to, directed patrols and special events as authorized by the Watch
Commander or other supervisor.
B. Bicycle officers will be selected by the Deputy Chief and will receive formal documented
Police Bicycle Officer training by an approved training provider before use of a department
police bicycle.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD – 19.9
Page 2 of 5
C. Officers utilizing the joint operation UTV will receive in-service driver training and
familiarization of operation of the vehicle prior to use. The UTV shall only be operated by a
trained member of the Police or Fire Department. The manufacturer’s manual and recommended
practices shall be thoroughly followed.
D. Duties of Officers utilizing special purposes vehicles may include:
1. Patrol of sectors and areas which historically have higher incidents of calls for service,
reported crimes, and arrests.
2. Saturation patrol of areas requiring special attention due to criminal activity, citizen
complaints, or special events.
3. Patrol of areas that would be inaccessible to routine patrols, such as city parks and
recreational trails.
4. Special events and situations.
5. Safety programs in conjunction with traffic safety or crime prevention initiatives.
6. Officers utilizing special purpose vehicles may be given calls for service within their
assigned patrol area and are encouraged to assist sector officers or to handle sector calls
for service that they are close to.
7. Officers utilizing special purposes vehicles are encouraged to initiate enforcement
activities, such as pedestrian checks, etc. not including traffic stops, in their assigned
areas and to act on issues brought to their attention by the community.
8. Officers utilizing special purpose vehicles, when feasible, should initiate interaction
with residents and businesspeople within their assigned area, to develop a strong personal
rapport aimed at effectively carrying out the mission and objectives of the unit.
9. Officers utilizing special purposes vehicles will not do so for an entire shift. Special
purpose vehicles must be secured prior to entering buildings or businesses, or to make
personal relief or for meals.
E. Arrests
Officers making an arrest while utilizing a special purpose vehicle will have the prisoner
conveyed to the station by a patrol vehicle. The arresting Officer will then report to the
station for prisoner processing.
F. Safety

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD – 19.9
Page 3 of 5
1. Special purpose vehicles will always be operated in a safe and prudent manner. At no
time will an operator risk damage to the vehicle by attempting to operate the vehicle
outside of its ability on any terrain.
2. Officers operating special purpose vehicles will consistently obey all traffic laws and
operate a vehicle with due regard when operating on or off a roadway.
3. Bicycles shall not be operated as emergency vehicles.
4. The UTV’s emergency lighting will be activated when used during an emergency
incident.
5. Officers will wear applicable safety gear when operating bicycles such as helmets,
protective eye wear, and gloves. Any other personal protective equipment, such as
reflective wear, will be worn as issued and/or required.
6. Drivers and passengers will always wear seatbelts while operating the UTV.
7. Special purpose vehicles shall be equipped with lighting, flashers, horns, signal
devices, etc. as may be required by state and local law for the operation of vehicles on the
roadways.
8. Head lamps/headlights and taillights will be used after dusk, in accordance with law, or
when subject to other traffic or roadways.
9. Bicycles will be secured to an immovable object whenever the officer is away from it.
The UTV will be parked with the key removed.
10. At no time shall the governed speed of the UTV be bypassed.
G. Operations
1. Officers may use a department bicycle rack to transport bicycles to a location. Officers
will be required to secure the bicycle and rack in such a manner as to avoid damage or
disengagement from the patrol vehicle.
2. All bicycle racks and bicycles will be properly stored at the end of each officer’s tour
of duty and will not be left attached to a patrol vehicle at the end of a shift.
3. Officers will not leave the city on special purpose vehicles unless authorized by the
Chief of Police.
4. Special purpose vehicles will not be operated on Interstate 170.
5. Emergency operations requiring use of the UTV shall take precedence over use for
routine patrol or other activities.

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD – 19.9
Page 4 of 5
6. The on-duty Fire supervisor shall be notified by an Officer intending to utilize the
UTV for daily Police operations.
7. The UTV will be operated in high gear. Four-wheel drive will be initiated from a non-
moving status.
8. The UTV will be limited to a driver and two passengers while in motion.
9. In the event of an EMS patient transport with the UTV, the stokes basket will be
secured prior to movement. While transporting a patient, a passenger will ride in the bed
area with the seat belt secured. UTV speed will be limited to 15 mph max during patient
transport.
10. If the UTV is transported by trailer, safety chains and the 7 plug for lights must be
attached to the tow vehicle. When possible, a spotter will be used to assist with backing
up the trailer. The UTV will be secured with four straps. In the front, two straps will be
used over the front bumper and secured to the d-ring on the trailer. In the rear, two straps
will be attached to the trailer hitch and secured to the d-ring on the trailer. The UTV will
be secured close to the front of the trailer and using the connections points on the trailer.
11. Wheel chocks will be used when the trailer is not attached to a vehicle. If unloading
the trailer and it is not connected to a vehicle, the stabilization jacks on the rear of the
trailer will be used along with wheel chocks.
H. Uniforms and Equipment
1. Officers utilizing Police bicycles will wear Department-approved shorts/pants and
approved polos with appropriate black shoes.
2. Wearing body armor is mandatory unless otherwise approved by the Chief of Police.
3. The Police bicycle rack bag will be equipped with rubber gloves, tube repair, a
flashlight and any other needed equipment.
4. The UTV may have specialized equipment assigned to it based on joint situational use
with the Fire Department.
I. Maintenance
1. Officers utilizing special purpose vehicles shall perform a pre-operation check of the
vehicle prior to operation. Officer shall immediately report any deficiencies such as loss,
damage, malfunction, etc., to their supervisor. Appropriate further notifications will be
made through the chain of command.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD – 19.9
Page 5 of 5
2. If a Police bicycle has a flat tire or other malfunctions that cannot be repaired in the
field, the bike will be transported to the station and arrangements made as soon as
possible for repairs.
3. No alterations or contract repairs will be made to any special purpose vehicle without
the approval of the Chief of Police.
4. Maintenance issues for the joint UTV will be coordinated with the Fire Department
prior to any service being conducted.
5. Each Department is responsible for maintaining any specialized equipment that they
store and/or utilize on the UTV.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 7/8/2024
Expiration: Indefinite
Cancels OPD - 19.4

-- 5 of 5 --

