OPD - 2.1
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Task Force
Major Case Squad
TASK FORCE (PARTICIPATING AGENCY)
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish the option and need for officers to
participate in the Greater St. Louis Major Case Squad and other specialized task forces.
II. TASK FORCE:
A. The purpose of such squads or task forces is to pool resources and expertise and may
be formed on a temporary basis to handle specific crime problems within the City of
Olivette or the metropolitan area. Crime specific offenses may include, but are not
limited to homicides, robberies, rapes, auto thefts, and burglary cases.
B. RSMO 70.835 establishes authority for participation in major case squads.
C. Section 200.050 of the Olivette Municipal Code establishes authority for participation
in major case squads.
D. When participating in a task force, other than the Major Case Squad, a written
agreement will be executed that addresses the following:
1. Operational objectives;
2. Control;
3. Participation levels;
4. Participant qualifications; and
5. Personnel policies.
E. The following shall serve as a basic guide for the Department’s participation in such
task forces:

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 2.1
Page 2 of 2
1. Current manpower and caseload assignments permit an investigator being
assigned to a task force.
2. Participation in a task force will be supported by documentation.
3. While serving on such task forces, the officer assigned shall be under the direct
supervision of the agency hosting the task force, or a predetermined commander.
4. The Chief of Police will evaluate the scope of the task force and determine
what department resources may be committed.
5. Evaluation - At the conclusion of each week, the Chief of Police shall evaluate
the need to continue assignment of an investigator to the task force, if such task
force is designed on a temporary basis. If long term, evaluation of continuation
will be made at the direction of the Chief of Police. At the conclusion of the task
force, (other than the Greater St. Louis Major Case Squad), the investigator
assigned shall prepare a memorandum as to their evaluation of the task force’s
productivity (i.e. cases cleared, number of arrests made, property recovered, and
man hours worked).
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 2/18/2010
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 5/18/2016
Revised: 1/14/2020
Revised: 11/3/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

