OPD - 20.1
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Traffic Safety
TRAFFIC SAFETY FUNCTION
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish processes and procedures for the
administration of Department-wide traffic related responsibilities and services.
B. It is the policy of the Department to promote traffic safety programs through the
thorough investigation and analysis of traffic crashes, pro-active enforcement of traffic
violations, providing educational programs to the community, and interaction with
roadway engineers to improve hazardous conditions.
II. RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The Bureau of Field Operations is primarily responsible for traffic safety. This will be
carried out in such a manner as to be flexible enough to meet the demands of selective
enforcement, congestion relief, and traffic control measures.
B. Shift commanders will use data available through Department records, officer
observations, and citizen complaints, to aid in traffic safety and traffic movement
measures by their platoons.
C. Supervisors:
1. Are responsible for the traffic safety function.
2. Will direct personnel to meet the Department’s goals for traffic safety and
enforcement.
3. Will provide direct supervision at the scene of crashes involving fatalities,
serious injury, or hazardous material situations.
4. Will direct and coordinate selective enforcement activities with their platoons.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 20.1
Page 2 of 2
D. Officers:
1. Are responsible for traffic safety.
2. Will fully investigate and report traffic crashes they observe or to which they
are assigned.
3. Will be alert to violations of traffic laws and ordinances, and will take
appropriate enforcement actions when violations are observed.
4. Will immediately report hazardous conditions, malfunctioning, damaged, or
missing traffic control devices, streetlights malfunctioning, or other conditions
that pose a threat to traffic safety.
III. TRAFFIC SAFETY:
A. The Department has a Traffic Safety officer within the Bureau of Field Operations.
B. Duties of the Traffic Safety Officer:
1. This officer will receive additional training in traffic crash investigation, traffic
enforcement and special traffic programs.
2. Implementation of enforcement programs.
3. Coordination of DWI enforcement programs.
4. Procure and maintain specialized equipment.
5. Development and supervision of traffic safety related grants.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/30/2009
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 11/22/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

