OPD - 21.10
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Motorists in Need
Emergency Services
Vehicle Lockouts
MOTORIST ASSISTANCE
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish traffic procedures for motorist
assistance calls for service.
II. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS:
A. Officers will be alert for motorists, and stranded persons, who may need general
assistance, particularly after dark or in an area of congestion or hazard.
B. Officers will stop to assist motorists in need. If an assignment prevents the officer
from rendering assistance personally, the officer should notify communications to
dispatch another unit. If possible, the officer en route to another assignment should
advise the motorist that assistance is en route.
C. Appropriate actions should be taken for the immediate removal of disabled vehicles
from the roadway, if necessary, to avoid further traffic problems.
D. Department vehicles will not be used to push or pull any vehicle.
E. Service to a stranded motorist may include:
1. Information and directions;
2. Contacting emergency road service;
3. Contacting family or friends to respond; or

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 21.10
Page 2 of 2
4. Transportation to a place of safety, to obtain service or fuel, or to the
motorist’s residence if within the City of Olivette or as otherwise directed by the
shift commander.
III. EMERGENCY SERVICES:
Officers should request the dispatch of any necessary medical or fire assistance
immediately upon determining the nature of roadside emergency.
A. Medical Emergencies – Officers should provide first responder medical assistance if
needed.
B. Fire Emergencies – Officers should ensure that occupants and spectators are removed
to a safe location. If the fire is minor in nature, officers may use the extinguisher from
the trunk of the patrol car to extinguish the fire. Officers should consider the risk
involved with engaging these fires.
IV. VEHICLE LOCKOUTS:
A. An officer should determine that the person with the vehicle has a legitimate right to
the vehicle and request positive identification.
B. The officer may request that ECDC contact a tow company or locksmith.
C. If a child is trapped inside the vehicle, the officer will request that ECDC dispatch fire
units to gain access.
D. Officers will not attempt to gain entry into a locked vehicle unless otherwise directed
by a supervisor.
The General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 1/5/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

