OPD - 21.2
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Minors
Juveniles Under 15 Years of Age
Juveniles 15 Years of Age and Older
Military Personnel
Congressional Immunity
State Legislative Immunity
Diplomatic Immunity
Non-Residents
SPECIAL PROCESSING AND IMMUNITIES
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for traffic stops that
may require special processing.
B. Certain classes of people may require special processing due to age, military
assignment, or diplomatic immunity. The procedures for these individuals are outlined
below.
II. MINORS:
The Municipal Court requires that a parent or guardian must appear in court with their
minor child if the child stopped for traffic offenses is:
1. Under 18 and charged with a drug or alcohol related offense; or
2. Under 16 and charged with a traffic violation requiring a court appearance.

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 21.2
Page 2 of 3
III. JUVENILES UNDER 15 YEARS OF AGE:
The violation of traffic related laws and ordinances should be referred to the St. Louis
County Family Court and the juvenile released to the custody of a parent/guardian or the
St. Louis County Family Court. The Uniform Traffic Ticket may be used for the referral
by writing “To Be Notified” in the court date box and “Family Court” in the Prosecutor’s
signature box, with the following information required in the Notes section of the officer
copy of the ticket:
1. Parent(s) names,
2. Home telephone number(s),
3. Parent occupation, and
4. Juvenile’s school and grade.
IV. JUVENILES 15 YEARS OF AGE AND OLDER:
The officer must determine if the violation is a felony or not. If a non-felony, the officer
may issue a Uniform Traffic Ticket as would be issued to an adult. If a felony, the
juvenile must be referred to the St. Louis County Family Court. Juveniles, age 15 to
under 18, will not be held for bond but will be released to a parent/guardian or the St.
Louis County Family Court.
V. MILITARY PERSONNEL:
Members of the United States Armed Forces are not immune from prosecution and the
officer’s enforcement action should not be affected by this status.
VI. CONGRESSIONAL IMMUNITY:
Members of the United States Congress in all cases except treason, felonies, and breach
of the peace, are immune from arrest during their attendance at the session of their
respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same.
VII. STATE LEGISLATIVE IMMUNITY:
Missouri Senators and Representatives shall in all cases except treason, felonies, and
breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during the session of the General Assembly
and for fifteen days before the commencement of and after the termination of the session.
VIII. DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY:
As a principle of international law, Federal statute extends diplomatic immunity from
criminal and civil prosecution to diplomats, their families, and employees as follows

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 21.2
Page 3 of 3
below. While the burden is upon the diplomat to claim immunity, valid credentials and
status can be verified through the State Department during business hours (202) 647-
1727, or after-hours (517) 345-3146.
1. Foreign Diplomats: Duly accredited diplomatic officers, their families, and
their servants and employees, if not nationals of, or a permanent resident of the
receiving state.
2. Foreign Consular Officer: Consuls-General, Deputy Consuls Generals,
Consuls, and Vice Consuls are immune from prosecution for acts committed in
the exercise of Consul functions (families of Consul Officers are not immune
from prosecution).
IX. NON-RESIDENTS OF OLIVETTE
The Revised Statutes of Missouri, RSMo 544.0469 provides for reciprocal provisions
with certain other states to address how violators are treated, specifically through the
Non-Resident Violator Compact. Out-of-area or out-of-state violators shall not be treated
differently than any other typical violator.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/05/2009
Revised: 3/22/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 2/23/2021
Revised: 11/22/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

