OPD - 21.4
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Accidents
Emergency Traffic Plan
Hazardous Materials
Fire Hazards
REPORTS AND ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish the procedures for investigating traffic
accidents and hazards.
II. RESPONSIBILITY OF COMMUNICATIONS UNIT:
A. One or more police officers, as appropriate, will be immediately dispatched to all
traffic accidents. The supervisor will be dispatched to all accidents involving serious
injuries or fatalities.
B. Dispatchers will advise the responding officer(s) of:
1. The exact location of the accident and
2. The severity of the accident:
a. 10-50 J1 with no injuries;
b. 10-50 J2 with reported injuries;
c. 10-50 J3 with roadway blocked; or
d. 10-50 J4 with fatalities.
C. Dispatchers will dispatch assist units including fire and ambulance as available
information requires.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 2 of 7
III. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OFFICER ASSIGNED:
A. When dispatched to an accident scene, the officer will respond promptly but in
accordance with the provisions concerning the operation of Department vehicles.
B. The primary officer assigned to the accident will retain charge of the scene until
completion of the investigation, the arrival of a supervisor, or the assignment and arrival
of a Reconstructionist.
C. Upon arrival at the scene, officers shall:
1. Position the patrol vehicle(s) to provide maximum protection of the scene and
oncoming traffic.
2. Provide first responder medical assistance as needed.
3. Deploy flares or cones as needed.
4. Officers handling accidents or directing traffic on the roadway will at all times,
wear the Department issued reflective traffic vest or high visibility reflective
jacket.
5. Be alert for and report any potential hazards, i.e. fire, hazardous material, fuel
spills, etc.
6. Take all necessary actions to minimize danger to the public and other assisting
units.
7. Locate and identify all drivers, vehicle occupants, and witnesses, remove all
drivers and occupants to a place of safety and control, secure and/or collect
evidence, interview all drivers, occupants, and witnesses separately, if possible,
and provide description of any vehicles/drivers who left the scene.
8. Ensure that all debris is removed from the roadway by the tow operator and
remain on the scene until any hazardous conditions are corrected.
9. In the event that parties involved are transported to medical facilities before
interview, the accident involves a Leaving the Scene of an Accident or the on-
scene investigation does not provide enough information to determine probable
contributing circumstances, officers may be required to conduct follow-up
investigations.
10. Officers may issue a Missouri Uniform Complaint Summons(es) at the scene
of an accident whenever they witness a violation of law or ordinance.

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 3 of 7
IV. EMERGENCY TRAFFIC PLAN:
A. The Emergency Traffic Plan may be initiated by the Shift Commander when, due to
weather or workload conditions, motor vehicle accident reports become too numerous to
be handled at the scene by patrol units.
B. When activated, notification will be made through the chain of command to the Chief
of Police.
C. Under the Emergency Traffic Plan, officers will not immediately take reports on
minor “property damage only” accidents under the following circumstances:
1. All involved drivers/property owners are present at the scene,
2. All vehicles involved can be driven from the scene,
3. No vehicle or property of the City, a public utility, or public transportation
agency is involved,
4. No hazardous material condition exists at the scene, and
5. No driver impairment due to alcohol or drugs.
D. Officers on the scene of an accident, exempt from reporting under the emergency
plan, will:
1. Advise the parties involved that no report will be prepared due to the existing
emergency.
2. Advise the drivers/owners involved in the accident to exchange information.
Officers will verify the driver/owner identity,
3. Advise drivers/ owners involved in the accident of the event number for the
call.
4. Classify the disposed assignment as NRN (no report needed).
V. PROPERTY OF ACCIDENT VICTIMS:
A. Officers responding to accident scenes have a responsibility to safeguard the personal
property of victims from theft. This responsibility is greater in the case of a fatality or
disabling injury.
B. If personal property is released to a relative or other agency, the transfer should be
documented in the report.

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 4 of 7
C. If personal property must be removed from the accident scene by Department
personnel, it will be conveyed to the station and properly packaged as property, “Hold for
Safekeeping,” and secured in an evidence locker until the owner can retrieve it.
VI. ACCIDENT RECONSTRUCTION:
Traffic accident information will be provided to a Certified Accident Reconstructionist
for reconstruction whenever the crash involves one of the following conditions:
A. A fatality,
B. An injury that on-scene medical personnel advise will result in a fatality,
C. A serious disabling injury to any person in an accident involving a City vehicle, or
D. Any other accident where, in the Shift Commander’s discretion, a reconstruction is
warranted.
E. If an accident reconstruction team is needed, the Watch Commander should contact
ECDC and advise them. ECDC will contact a local agency for assistance.
F. Steps to be taken at crash scenes:
1. Unless exigent circumstances exist, do not move the vehicles.
2. Block off the area.
3. Olivette officers can interview witnesses and the driver/drivers.
4. Olivette officers would be responsible for writing the auto accident. St. Louis
County Police or the Missouri Highway Patrol would supplement the report with
the reconstruction information.
5. If vehicles or bodies need to be moved prior to the reconstruction officer arriving
on scene, Olivette officers should mark the locations of the vehicles and bodies
using a pink colored spray paint on the roadway. Taking pictures prior to moving
items is helpful. These actions will help the reconstruction officer make his/her
calculations.
G. Reconstruction is not done for one vehicle auto accidents where the driver has died.
H. According to the law Section 577.021RSMO, officers are required to make all
reasonable efforts to chemical test surviving drivers in fatal motor vehicle crashes.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 5 of 7
VII. ACCIDENTS INVOLVING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND/OR FIRE
HAZARDS:
A. Officers responding to accidents should always be alert for the potential of a
hazardous material spill or leak. Officers should approach any suspected hazardous
material situation from upwind and approach only to a safe distance. Only properly
equipped and trained personnel will enter the hazardous material zone.
B. Officers suspecting a hazardous material situation should consult the Hazardous
Materials Response Guide that is assigned to each officer. The placard on cargo vehicles
will be referenced in the Guide in an attempt to make a preliminary identification of the
cargo in question. In addition, officers may request communication personnel make a
REJIS inquiry of the placard for additional information.
C. In all hazardous material/ fire situations, the Fire Department will be notified
immediately. The Fire Department will take control of the hazardous material situation
upon their arrival and the officer will continue to assist as needed.
D. The officer suspecting a hazardous material situation will request a supervisor
immediately.
E. The officer will take appropriate steps to:
1. Stabilize and protect the scene,
2. Remove persons from the threat zone,
3. Suppress flames if possible, and
4. Control traffic in and around the threat zone.
F. Officers of this Department shall receive annual awareness level training for events
involving hazardous materials.
VIII. ACCIDENTS INVOLVING “LEAVING THE SCENE OF AN ACCIDENT:”
A. If the accident involves one or more persons “leaving the scene of an accident,” the
responding officer will fully investigate the accident in attempt to obtain the following
information:
1. Description of suspect vehicle including possible damage,
2. Description of driver and occupants of suspected vehicle, and
3. Direction of travel by suspect vehicle.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 6 of 7
4. The officer will provide ECDC with the descriptive information for broadcast
to other units and agencies.
5. Collect all evidence at the scene.
B. Follow-up investigations of Leaving the Scene cases will be assigned to the Bureau of
Investigation after the officer has exhausted all leads and has:
1. Re-contacted drivers, passengers, and witnesses,
2. If appropriate, canvassed the area of the accident for additional witnesses, and
3. Interviewed suspects.
IX. TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORT PROCEDURES:
A. The Department reports all traffic accidents in accordance with the State Traffic
Accident Reporting System (S.T.A.R.S.). A Missouri S.T.A.R.S. report is required when
an accident meets any of the following criteria:
1. On a public roadway:
a. An injury or fatality,
b. Leaving the scene of the accident,
c. Damaged to a parked vehicle, and the owner is not present,
d. Accidents requiring vehicle to be towed, or
e. Impairment due to alcohol or drugs.
2. On private property involving:
a. An injury or fatality,
b. Leaving the scene of the accident,
c. Damage to a parked vehicle and the owner is not present,
d. Any damage to real property,
e. Accidents requiring vehicles to be towed, or
f. Impairment due to alcohol or drugs.

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD - 21.4
Page 7 of 7
3. Involving City owned vehicles or property, and any other government owned
vehicles or property, public utility vehicles or property, or public transportation
vehicles or property.
4. Any other situation where, in the officer’s or supervisor’s discretion, a report is
warranted.
X. ROUTING OF COMPLETED TRAFFIC ACCIDENT (S.T.A.R.S.) REPORTS:
A. A single complaint number will be assigned to each traffic accident report.
B. Completed reports will be submitted to the officer’s immediate supervisor for review
and approval.
1. Once approved, the report will be forwarded to the S.T.A.R.S. supervisor for
final review and approval.
2. The S.T.A.R.S. supervisor will electronically submit a copy of the report to the
Missouri State Highway Patrol S.T.A.R.S. Unit.
C. Approved S.T.A.R.S. reports will be routed to the Records Clerk who will:
1. Prepare photocopies of all Leaving the Scene reports, file one (1) copy, forward
one (1) copy to the Detective Bureau and provide one (1) copy to the Court Clerk, if
needed.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY THE ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 3/22/2018
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 6/17/2021
Revised: 12/5/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

