OPD - 21.6
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Vehicle Stop Operations
Reporting Vehicle Stops
High Risk Stops
Felony Vehicle Stops
________________________________________________________________________
CONTACT WITH TRAFFIC VIOLATORS
I. PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines for stopping and
approaching traffic violators.
B. The practice of using racial, age, gender or any other socioeconomic characteristic as
the sole determinant for initiating a car stop is illegal and will not be tolerated in the
Olivette Police Department.
C. All officers shall have clear, articulate and lawful reasonable suspicion independent of
race, national origin, citizenship, religion, ethnicity, age, gender or sexual orientation to
justify any car stop for either traffic or criminal investigation purposes and upon making
such car stops shall conduct investigations and enforce the law fairly and equally. All
stops, searches, seizures, and arrests shall be conducted and reported in accordance with
the law and with the regulations of this police department. Officers shall comply with all
statutes on the reporting of traffic stop information [590.650 RSMo] promptly and
accurately.
II. PROCEDURE
The stopping and approaching of persons observed violating traffic laws is an integral
part of the day-to-day operation of Patrol Division personnel. NO vehicle stop should be
considered to be routine and there are inherent dangers in every vehicle stop.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 2 of 7
A. Vehicle Stop Operations
1. Nothing in this operational guideline precludes an officer from stopping a
vehicle to offer help [e.g. to inform the driver that an item was left on the roof or a
substance is leaking from the car].
2. Officers are prohibited from stopping, detaining, searching or arresting anyone
based solely on the person's race, national origin, citizenship, religion, ethnicity,
age, gender, sexual orientation, or perceived economic class.
B. Review of Vehicle Stop Practices
1. Annually, the Attorney General for the State of Missouri will publish a report
on vehicle stops for the Olivette Police Department.
2. The Chief of Police or his designee will review this report and other traffic stop
data to determine any concerning or suspected patterns.
3. The Chief of Police, as required by state law, will determine if officers are
exhibiting a pattern of inappropriate traffic stop practices. If so, an investigation
shall be ordered.
4. Any personnel found to have engaged in race-based stops shall receive
appropriate counseling and training within ninety (90) days of the review.
C. Duty to Act and Report
1. Officers shall perform their required duties and shall not refrain from
conducting lawful traffic stops only because they wish to avoid reporting
requirements under this guideline.
2. Officers are required to accurately report all stops as required by law.
3. Supervisors shall ensure that officers comply with the policies and procedures
in this Directive.
4. An on-duty supervisor shall promptly respond to an incident when informed
that a person is making a complaint alleging profiling or other improper conduct.
5. After discussing the matter with the complainant, if the matter is not resolved,
the supervisor shall complete an Employee Conduct Review Form #OPD – F1015
and shall advise the complainant that it will be forwarded through the chain of
command to the Chief of Police.

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 3 of 7
D. Purpose of Violator Stops
1. Departmental personnel stop traffic violators as part of the Department's overall
traffic enforcement efforts. Violators are stopped and contacted for a number of
reasons:
a. To warn or cite violators when appropriate
b. To locate and apprehend suspects
c. To act as a deterrent to other motorists
2. The primary purpose for all traffic enforcement activity is to gain voluntary
compliance with traffic and other laws.
E. Location of Violator Stops
Personnel must consider several issues concerning the location for making a vehicle stop
for a traffic violation. Personnel may choose to delay a stop until a more suitable
location is found. When stopping a violator, personnel should consider traffic
congestion, availability of a back-up officer if needed, the roadway configuration - hill,
curve, width, shoulder size, etc.
F. Radio Traffic
For officer safety reasons, personnel shall provide information to communications about
all traffic violator stops. The following information should be relayed prior to stopping
the vehicle:
1. Planned location of the stop
2. License number of violator's vehicle
3. Vehicle description and number and basic description of occupants may be
provided as needed.
G. Positioning of Police Vehicle
Personnel should position their police vehicle behind and in relation to the violator’s
vehicle in such a manner that affords the greatest amount of safety for the personnel and
the violator. There are two basic methods of positioning the police vehicle.
1. The offset method has the police vehicle, other than a motorcycle, parallel with
the violator's vehicle but offset two to three feet to the left on a traffic stop where
the violator has pulled to the right side of the roadway.
2. The angle method has the police vehicle, other than a motorcycle, at an angle
with the front of the police protruding out to the left.

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 4 of 7
H. Approaching/ Contacting the Violator
The approaching of a violator's vehicle can put police personnel at risk. Personnel should
develop good, safe habits for this process. Precautions should also be taken once
personnel have reached the violator.
I. Conversation with Violator
The majority of violators contacted by police personnel are ordinary citizens who may
form their entire opinion of the Police Department from one encounter on a traffic stop.
Personnel should keep this and all safety precautions in mind during a traffic stop:
1. Explain the reason for the traffic stop to the violator
2. Do not lecture or "talk down" to the violator
3. Do not argue with a violator
J. Reporting Vehicle Stops
1. In addition to any routine offense or incident reporting, officers shall complete
a Traffic Analysis for any stop made for the purposes of enforcement of state
motor vehicles statutes, or municipal traffic ordinances; either for moving
violations or equipment violations.
2. Completion of the form shall be in accordance with Department racial profiling
guidelines.
K. Release to Public
1. Access to specific, individualized vehicle stop information by the public shall
only be authorized by subpoena or an Open Records request following the review
of and advice from the City Attorney.
2. Release of traffic stop data collected on the traffic stop record shall be
authorized by the Chief of Police.
L. Action Taken on Violations
In most situations, police personnel may use their discretion to determine the best method
to deal with a violator. The goal of "voluntary compliance" should be kept in mind.
1. Personnel may issue warnings to a violator for minor offenses.
2. Personnel may issue the violator a summons for the offense
3. Personnel may arrest certain violators.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 5 of 7
M. Criminal History and Driving Record Checks
Personnel should complete criminal history and/or driving history checks on violators. If
the mobile data terminal in a police vehicle is not responding, officers should have ECDC
complete these checks. Due to a number of situations this is not always practical.
Personnel should use their own judgment in requesting these checks.
1. Personnel should consider the nature of the violation, actions of violator and
the amount of time required to complete these checks when requesting them.
2. These checks must be completed if a violator is arrested.
N. Issuing a Summons
1. When personnel issue a summons to a violator a number of steps must be
completed prior to the release of the violator.
a. Explain the charge for which the summons was issued.
b. Summons the violator to the appropriate court [Municipal or Associate
Circuit] and explain the court location to the violator.
c. Assign the proper court date and time to the violator.
2. Municipal Court violations should be cited into court for the violation and
should be assigned a court date that has been issued by the Court Clerk.
3. Associate Circuit violations should be cited in court for the violation and the
officer shall write in the court date section of the citation "To Be Notified".
4. Officers should explain available alternatives to the violator.
O. Completing a Violator Stop
Once a violator has been warned or a summons has been issued, the officer must continue
to be cautious until the violator has left the location.
P. Stops at Night
It is important during all violator stops to be able to see the actions and movements of the
occupants of the stopped vehicle. This becomes more difficult during nighttime hours.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 6 of 7
Q. High Risk Stops
For a number of reasons, violator stops can become high-risk stops. An impaired driver
or vehicle occupants who are wanted for the commission of a crime may pose an elevated
threat to the safety of the officer. The following procedures may be employed when an
officer initiates a high- risk stop:
1. When planning to stop the suspect vehicle, the officer shall notify
Communications by voice advising the nature or reason for the stop, license,
vehicle description, occupant information, and direction of travel, and request
appropriate assistance.
2. The officer should not initiate high risk vehicle stop alone, unless assist units
will not be available or the urgency of the situation demands immediate action.
3. After selecting an appropriate location and with adequate back-up, the officer
should signal the suspect to stop.
4. Once the suspect vehicle has stopped, officers should exit their vehicles quickly
and assume a position of cover. The officers will not approach the suspect
vehicle.
5. The officer initiating the stop should issue verbal commands to the suspects,
through the public address system if available. These commands will be specific,
telling the driver and occupants how to exit the vehicle and what actions to take.
Only one officer should issue commands.
6. Occupants will be removed from the vehicle one at a time whenever possible.
R. Felony Vehicle Stops
Officers who have reason to believe a suspect(s) is armed, has committed or is wanted for
a violent felony or possesses a significant threat to the officer shall conduct a felony
vehicle stop.
S. Role of the Backup Officer
The officer initiating a traffic stop may use his / her discretion on requesting a back-up
officer.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD - 21.6
Page 7 of 7
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 8/17/2020
Revsied: 1/5/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

