OPD - 21.7
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Pace
Radar/ Laser Units
SPEED LIMIT ENFORCEMENT
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish different means and techniques for
officers to enforce the speed limits.
B. Officers may use any of the following enforcement techniques to counter speeding
violations within the City of Olivette.
II. PACE:
The officer shall maintain a constant speed with the violator, neither gaining nor losing
distance between the police vehicle and the violator’s vehicle. The distance traveled
should be adequate enough to obtain an accurate measurement.
III. RADAR/LASER:
A. The officer may use Department owned speed-measuring devices in either moving or
stationary modes as is applicable to the specific unit in use.
1. The Department currently has the following speed measuring devices in
service:
a. Stalker brand, XLR LIDAR, handheld laser unit,
b. Stalker brand handheld radar unit,
c. Stalker brand, Dual antennae moving/stationary radar units mounted in
patrol vehicles,
d. Monitor Systems Prodigy 23L Pacesetter radar trailer,
f. Radarsign TC-400 radar speed sign.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 21.7
Page 2 of 2
B. Only those officers who have received instruction from radar instructors trained to the
standards of the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration, either during
recruit training, in-service or at off-site programs, may operate the laser or radar
equipment for which they have been trained.
C. Radar units will be tested for accuracy before and after use with the tuning fork(s)
assigned to the specific radar unit, as well as with any internal calibration performed by
the unit itself. The tuning forks are assigned to each unit by manufacturer.
D. Radar operators will use their discretion when deploying the systems. Factors
affecting an officer’s decision to use a Radar/Lidar system include, but are not limited to:
1. The systems are line of sight instruments and are affected by weather, terrain
and traffic conditions.
2. Heavy rain, snow and fog will diminish the capability of the units.
3. Large curves in the road or hills will diminish the capability of the units.
4. A large volume of traffic can make it difficult to distinguish between which
vehicle is speeding when utilizing a radar unit. A laser system eliminates this
issue.
E. Radar units will be calibrated annually by an authorized service provider.
F. If the radar unit (or tuning fork) is not calibrated properly, or malfunctions in any way,
a memorandum will be written by the officer and forwarded to the shift commander. The
radar unit will be inspected and arranged for its shipment to a factory authorized service
center for repairs.
G. The records on the calibration and maintenance of all radar/laser units as well as the
tuning forks assigned to each unit will be maintained in the records room.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 1/11/2010
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 1/5/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

