OPD - 21.8
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Traffic Direction
Traffic Control
TRAFFIC DIRECTION AND CONTROL
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for efficient and effective
traffic control. Traffic direction will be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
II. DIRECTION AND CONTROL:
A. All officers shall be alert for problems that hinder the smooth, safe, and orderly flow
of traffic throughout the City. Officers shall take immediate and appropriate action to
eliminate such problems. Necessary actions may include manually directing traffic and
re-routing traffic. Officers will notify the dispatcher and shift commander of any such
action taken.
B. All electric traffic signals located in Olivette are maintained by either the Missouri
Department of Transportation or the St. Louis County Department of Highways.
C. Police Officers are neither trained nor equipped to make traffic signal repairs or adjust
the timing of cycles. If a signal problem exists, officers will be responsible for
identifying the problem, stabilizing the traffic flow and requesting the appropriate
governmental agency to respond and repair the traffic signal. If necessary, appropriate
portable signage will be posted.
D. Traffic signals may be placed on flash if a traffic problem will be reduced by this
action. The officer responsible for such action shall ask the dispatcher to notify the
appropriate agency that the lights have been placed on flash. Officers are not authorized
to manually control traffic signal cycles.
E. Officers may be required to manually direct traffic under the following circumstances:
1. When traffic signals/signs are malfunctioning, inoperable, or missing,

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD - 21.8
Page 2 of 4
2. When intersections are grid locked, or
3. When other activities occur which force a change in normal traffic flow such
as fire, hazmat incident, accident scene, weather, utility wires down, water main
breaks, debris in roadway, funerals etc.
F. At fire or other critical incidents, officers will:
1. Direct and re-route traffic so as to keep the area open for additional emergency
equipment and to prevent traffic from driving across fire hoses.
2. Consult with Fire Department or other official in charge to determine their
needs.
G. While manually directing traffic, officers will wear Department issued reflective vests
at all times. During adverse weather conditions, officers will not wear the raincoat black
side out while directing traffic.
H. During periods of adverse weather and road conditions, officers will be cognizant of
the possibility of decreased visibility and increased stopping distances. If a roadway
becomes too hazardous for travel, the officer will notify the shift commander and take
appropriate action.
I. At accident scenes, officers will:
1. Contact all parties involved in the accident.
2. If there are no injuries and both vehicles are drivable, the vehicles should be
moved off the roadway. If the vehicles cannot be moved, the officer will have an
assisting unit direct traffic as needed.
3. Establish traffic control points to:
a. Allow for the ingress/egress of emergency equipment.
b. Halt or identify and establish alternate traffic routes around the crash
scene.
4. Notify ECDC to contact other agencies that may be affected.
J. When it becomes necessary to close or restrict the flow of traffic, officers on the scene
may utilize flares, barricades, traffic cones, portable stop signs and/or marked police
vehicles as a means of control. Police vehicles will have their emergency lights activated
when used to control traffic.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD - 21.8
Page 3 of 4
III. TRAFFIC HAZARDS:
Officers will remain alert for hazardous roadway conditions and take action to correct or
have corrected:
A. Debris in the Roadway – If an item can be removed by the officer, s/he shall do so. If
the debris requires special equipment to be removed, the dispatcher will be notified to
contact the appropriate agency. If the debris presents a hazard to vehicles or pedestrians,
the officer should remain on the scene until the debris can be removed.
B. Roadway Defects – The officer will notify the dispatcher to contact the appropriate
agency so the defect can be repaired. If the defect presents a hazard the officer should
consult with a supervisor to determine the appropriate action.
C. Inoperable or Damaged Traffic Control Devices or Signs – Officers will notify the
dispatcher to contact the appropriate agency responsible for repairing the signal/sign:
1) Manual traffic control may be required. The officer will provide control and should
notify the shift commander.
2) Portable stop signs are available at Public Works for Police Department use:
a. If portable stop signs are needed, notify the shift commander.
b. The shift commander will notify Public Works and have signs delivered to the
location needed. If after hours, officers will deliver and set up signs where
needed.
c. If the absence of the traffic signal/ sign poses an immediate threat at an
intersection, the officer will manually direct traffic at the intersection until the
temporary signs are in place.
d. When the electric signal or permanent sign has been restored, the officer will
request Public Works to pick up the temporary signs. If after hours, the signs
should be moved from the roadway and Public Works notified to pick them up.
D. Street Lights – Officers will remain alert for street lights not burning at night, or
burning during daylight hours. Inoperable street lamps will be reported to the
appropriate agency.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD - 21.8
Page 4 of 4
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 3/20/2018
Revised: 7/10/2018
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 1/5/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

