OPD - 22.17
Page 1 of 8
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
CIT
Mental Health
______________________________________________________________________________
MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS INTERVENTION
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish procedural guidelines for officers of this
Department governing the functions, responsibilities and police interactions when dealing with
subjects experiencing a mental health crisis.
II. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to ensure a consistently high level of service is
provided to community members. Department members shall afford people who have mental
illnesses the same rights, dignity and access to police and other government and community
services as are provided to all citizens.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. CIT COUNCIL – A committee comprised of law enforcement officials, court officials and
mental health advocates, responsible for training and policy concerning various crisis
intervention issues. The Council also serves as a review board that meets to discuss individual
cases and formulate recommendations.
B. CRISIS INTERVENTION TEAM (CIT) – Sworn officers specially trained and designated to
handle crisis situations involving the mentally ill or individuals going through a mental health
crisis.
C. MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS – A situation where an individual’s normal coping mechanisms
have become overwhelmed causing that individual to pose an immediate and significant risk to
self or other.
D. CONSUMER – A term commonly used by the mental health community when referring to an
individual with a suspected mental illness or who is involved in a perceived mental crisis and
utilizes mental health services.
E. MENTAL ILLNESS – Diagnosable and non-diagnosable disorders, each with its own specific
characteristics to include, but not limited to:

-- 1 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 2 of 8
• Schizophrenia
• Bipolar Disorder
• Schizo-Affective Disorder
• Obsessive Compulsive Personality Disorder
• Major Depressive Disorder
• Panic Disorder
• Personality Disorder
• Other mental illnesses that can cause disturbance with others or the environment.
IV. GENERAL
A. All members of this Department below the rank of Major shall complete the forty (40) hour
basic Crisis Intervention Team training course, schedule permitting. The course will be
completed through the St. Louis County and Municipal Police Academy or other approved
training provider.
B. The long-range objectives of the program shall be to identify individuals suffering from
extended bouts of mental health problems and to initiate measures to reduce the frequency of
police contacts. Information will be channeled back to the field to promote increased safety for
both police personnel and the population at large, as well as provide community resources to
those in need of mental health services.
C. Guidelines for recognition of persons suffering from mental illness:
1. Others saying the person is not him/herself.
2. Behavior dangerous to themselves or others.
3. Withdrawn behavior, talking only to themselves.
4. Experiencing sensations not based on reality such as visions, odors, tastes, voices.
Unrealistic ideas or grand thoughts. Believing they are worthless. Exaggerating events.
Loss of memory and/or time.
D. Contact, interviews and interrogation:
1. Personnel who interact with individuals that may be mentally ill should consider safety
issues since a person with mental illness may react differently. This includes persons who
are victims, witnesses and suspects.
2. Evaluate the situation.
3. Do not abuse or threaten the person.
4. Avoid unnecessary excitement.

-- 2 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 3 of 8
5. Sworn personnel who find it necessary to interview or interrogate a person with a
mental illness shall follow all applicable laws and procedures that would apply to any
other interview or interrogation.
E. Criteria for admission:
1. Criteria for involuntary admission to a mental health facility (RSMo 632.300):
a. The criteria for involuntary detention are that the person is suffering from a
mental disorder and presents either:
i. A substantial risk of inflicting serious physical harm upon their own
person or upon the person of another; or,
ii. A substantial risk of causing serious physical harm because of impaired
judgement with respect to hospitalization and need for treatment as
evidenced by the person’s inability to provide for their own basic
necessities (e.g., food, clothing, shelter, safety, medical care, etc.).
b. If the criteria for involuntary admission does exist (RSMo 632.305), the patient
may be admitted and lawfully detained for evaluation and treatment for up to 96
hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays).
F. Juveniles
1. Admission of a juvenile without a parent or guardian cannot be made without
consultation and permission of the Juvenile Court (RSMo 211.031).
G. Immunity from civil liability
1. Immunity from civil liability for public officials and other petitioners (RSMo 632.440
& 632.445), police officers, other public officials and other persons who file an
application for admission to a mental health facility for admission of a person for
evaluation and treatment for a 96-hour period are immune from civil liability so long as
the application was made in good faith and without gross negligence.
H. St. Louis area psychiatric hospitals-officer procedures
1. Based upon circumstances, it may become necessary to convey a person to one of the
area’s psychiatric hospitals:
a. Person(s) who meet the criteria in accordance with RSMo 632.300, as
described in section E above.
b. Person(s) who are extremely violent and cannot be handled by a private
facility.

-- 3 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 4 of 8
2. Upon arrival at a mental health facility, the officer should:
a. Advise the nurse or receptionist on duty that they are there.
b. Complete an application for admission and detention for evaluation and
treatment.
c. Wait with the person until they are examined by medical/mental health staff.
d. If after examination medical/mental health staff decides the person should be
admitted and the person will not sign themselves in voluntarily, the officer will be
asked to complete an affidavit stating their observations of the person’s behavior
and why the officer believes the person will cause harm to themselves or others.
e. Officers will retain their weapons while in the emergency room, however,
should it become necessary to leave that area to accompany a person to another
area, the officer may secure the weapon as may be appropriate or otherwise
required.
3. Whenever a police officer applies for initial detention and evaluation pursuant to
subsection 3 of RSMo 632.305, the mental health facility may, but is not required to,
accept the application and respondent. If the facility accepts the application and
respondent, the facility shall evaluate the respondent’s condition and admit them for
treatment or release them.
4. If the respondent is not accepted for evaluation and treatment (RSMo 632.310):
a. If the person is not accepted for admission by a mental health facility providing
96-hour evaluation and treatment, the facility shall immediately furnish
transportation, if not otherwise available, to return respondent to their place of
residence or other appropriate place.
b. In the case of a person who is transported by a police officer to a mental
health facility and is not admitted, the police officer shall provide such
transportation.
I. General information; any mental health facility
1. Whenever possible, officers should arrange for a relative or other responsible adult to
meet them at the facility to sign an affidavit or request for admission.
2. The officer should only petition for admission if there is no other relative or
responsible adult available to do so, or, in the absence of a relative or other responsible
adult, the person refuses to sign themselves in for evaluation and treatment.

-- 4 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 5 of 8
3. The Missouri Mental Health Coordinator may from time-to-time request that a police
officer take an individual into custody and convey them to a mental health facility for
evaluation and treatment (RSMo 632.305, subsection 3).
J. Training
1. It shall be the responsibility of the Department training coordinator to ensure all
personnel (both sworn and non-sworn) have received documented entry level training in
mental health issues.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the training coordinator that documented annual
refresher training is provided.
K. Reports
1. The CIT reporting system is managed by the St. Louis County CARE reporting
system. The purpose of this computer reporting system is for police departments to have
access to CIT interactions from other departments in the area. If a CARE Police report is
written that involves a CIT incident, then a CARE CIT supplemental report shall also be
completed.
2. A CARE CIT report shall be written to document all incidents dealing with mentally
disturbed individuals including but not limited to attempt suicides, domestic violence,
voluntary treatment or evaluation, and any behavior that may constitute harm or the threat
of harm to the individual suffering from the mental illness or any individuals they may
have threatened.
3. A CARE Police and CARE CIT report shall be written anytime an officer takes into
custody or is in any other way involved in having an individual transported and
involuntarily examined for evaluation and treatment.
NOTE: The policies contained in this order shall not supersede the guidelines promulgated in
general orders involving a “Response to Resistance or Aggression”.
V. DISPATCH PROCEDURES
When communications personnel receive a report of a situation known to involve a mental health
crisis, the dispatcher will immediately dispatch an officer and the Watch Commander.
1. Upon the officers’ arrival at the scene, additional assist units may be dispatched
contingent on initial reports from the first responders.
2. If the dispatch center receives a report of a situation that is not immediately recognized
as a mental health crisis, the first arriving officer should make that determination. Once
he/she determines that it is a mental health crisis, he/she will notify dispatch personnel to
alert the Watch Commander, who will respond to the scene.

-- 5 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 6 of 8
VI. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OFFICER
A. Upon arrival at the scene of a mental health crisis, officers will determine the circumstances
and be responsible for the initiation of the appropriate response.
B. Should the officer determine the individual involved poses a threat to himself or others, the
officer shall be responsible to arrange for transportation to a treatment facility with the Olivette
Fire Department. If the Olivette ambulance is not available, the individual shall be transported by
ambulance of a nearby agency.
C. The responding officer shall escort Fire Department personnel to the treatment facility in
order to complete the required affidavit for a psychological evaluation. If the individual is acting
in a violent manner, an officer shall respond in the ambulance for transportation.
D. In the event an individual is not taken into custody, the reporting officer will be responsible to
make notifications to mental health professionals for further care of the individual (i.e.
Behavioral Health Response).
1. The officer will complete the appropriate CARE CIT report. A CARE Police report
may also be completed if needed for criminal charges.
2. Assist with locating appropriate resources within the community.
3. Responsibilities of the officer continue with a person experiencing a mental health
crisis through the interview or interrogation process, should the person in crisis be a
witness to or suspect in a crime.
4. If it is determined that information concerning an individual should be entered into the
CAD Alert File, the reporting officer will ensure this information is forwarded to ECDC.
E. The Watch Commander will be promptly notified when an individual is taken into custody in
such incidents.
F. If an individual arrested during a mental health crisis needs to be transferred to another
holding facility, it will be the responsibility of the releasing officer to notify that agency of any
mental health concerns.
VIII. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CRISIS INTERVENTION COORDINATOR
The Department’s CIT Coordinator will monitor the activities of officers as they relate to mental
health crises. This shall include, but is not limited to:
• Approve CIT reports
• Ensuring that officers receive required training
• Ensure officers complete appropriate reports

-- 6 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 7 of 8
• Maintain a log of CIT incidents
• Make certain that CIT officers conduct necessary follow-up investigations on cases
investigated
• Prepare an annual statistical report to be submitted to the Chief of Police
• Serve as liaison with mental health and justice service personnel
VII. REPORT PROCEDURES
A. The officer initially assigned the call shall routinely be responsible for completing the original
incident report in regard to the assignment. All forms associated with the admission of an
individual into a treatment facility (if required) shall be attached to the report and saved in CARE
Scanned Documents. Any notifications made to mental health professionals shall be noted in the
report.
B. A CARE CIT report shall be completed for all calls that are deemed CIT calls in nature. If a
criminal offense has been committed, a CARE Police report shall also be completed, sharing the
same report number. The CARE CIT report will be completed and reviewed by the on-duty
supervisor. If a call is later determined to be CIT in nature, and a CARE CIT report was not
completed, the CIT Coordinator may request the responding officer to complete a CARE CIT
report.
C. In each case where a criminal offense has been committed by an individual in a mental health
crisis, warrant application will be made when applicable. For individuals arrested for
misdemeanor offenses, the case may be referred to the St. Louis County Municipal Mental
Health Court (MMHC) at the discretion of the Olivette Prosecuting Attorney.
VIII. MENTAL HEALTH COURT
The Mental Health Docket of the St. Louis County Municipal Court System is a specialized
docket for certain St. Louis County ordinance violations. If the St. Louis County Prosecuting
Attorney’s Office receives information indicating a defendant is possibly laboring under the
effects of some mental illness, his or her charges may be placed on the Mental Health Dockets.
This specialty docket strives to give intensive court supervision and mental health resource
assistance to such defendants.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 5/3/2018
Revised: 3/16/2020

-- 7 of 8 --

OPD - 22.17
Page 8 of 8
Revised: 11/24/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Revised: 5/20/2024
Revised: 1/14/2026
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 8 of 8 --

