OPD – 22.19
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Ride-Along Program
RIDE-ALONG PROGRAM
I. PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines for a Ride-Along program.
II. POLICY
In order to better acquaint members of the community with this Department and to
provide a better understanding of our role in the community, a Ride-Along program is
hereby established. The objective of the program is to allow certain individuals, who
either have a connection to law enforcement, or, who by participating in the Ride-Along
program, will enhance the rapport of the Department within the City, to apply and be
approved to ride in a patrol car with an officer during that officer's tour of duty.
III. DEFINITIONS
OBSERVER - any person that has applied for and been granted permission to ride
with a patrol officer during the patrol officer's normal tour of duty. It does not include
persons that have been arrested or are being transported in the police vehicle for
official business.
RIDE-ALONG RELEASE OF LIABILITY FORM - a form (OPD-F1100), signed by
all persons prior to their participation as an observer, which relieves the Department
from suits arising out of the participation in the Ride-Along program by the applicant.
IV. PROCEDURES
A. Participant Responsibilities
1. Persons desiring to participate in the Ride-Along program must submit their
interest in writing on form #OPD-F1100 to any officer of this Department to be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for review.
2. Ride-Along participants must be at least 14 years of age and have completed
the eighth grade. If the applicant is under 18 years of age, he/she must obtain

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD – 22.19
Page 2 of 4
written authorization from a parent/guardian to participate.
3. Ride-Along participants will not carry any type of weapon or firearm, even if
licensed by the state to do so, while they are participating in the program. This
restriction shall not apply to commissioned police officers or Federal agents.
4. To protect the privacy of the public, Observers will not be permitted to use
video cameras, cameras, or taping devices without the express written permission
of the Chief of Police. Observers will not disseminate any law enforcement
sensitive information via social media or other form of communication at any
time.
5. The Detective Bureau will complete a full record check of the Ride-Along
Applicant. The Detective Bureau will forward the completed record check to
the Chief of Police for review/approval.
6. If the request to Ride-Along is approved by the Chief of Police, he/she will
forward the approved request to a Watch Commander who will then assign the
Observer to a Patrol Officer.
7. Private citizens may only participate in the Ride-Along program once each
quarter. This restriction shall not apply to:
 City Council Members
 Department Chaplains
 Department Volunteers
 ECDC Dispatchers
 Law Enforcement Explorers
 Members of the Chief’s Community Resource Team
 Non-Sworn City Employees
8. The Ride-Along is typically a four-hour period; however, the Watch
Commander has the authority to extend the time up to a total of eight consecutive
hours.
9. Attire for the Observer shall be dress slacks, casual pants or blue jeans with no
skin exposure. Shirts may be button-down, polo-type or t-shirts; however, all
shirts shall be free from any writing or logos with the exception of the shirt
manufacturer. Shoes must be closed-toed. Attire that is not permitted includes
shorts, halter tops and tank tops. Any other attire other than specified above has
to be approved by the Patrol Commander or the Chief of Police.
10. Persons related to a Department employee may participate in the Ride-Along
program and may ride with their relative if so desired.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD – 22.19
Page 3 of 4
11. Only one (1) Observer may participate in the Ride-Along program during a
shift.
B. Patrol Officer Responsibilities
1. Any Patrol Officer who is assigned an Observer will ensure that the Ride-
Along participant has properly completed the Ride-Along Release of Liability
Form (OPD-F1100) and will forward the completed form to the Records Clerk
who will maintain a file for all Ride-Along participants.
2. Any Patrol Officer who is assigned an Observer will notify dispatch at the
beginning of his/her tour of duty that he/she has an individual participating in the
Ride-Along program.
3. Any Patrol Officer who is assigned an Observer will ensure the safety of the
Observer at all times. The officer will explain to the Observer that they are an
Observer only and should not get involved in actual police duties. However, the
Observer, like all citizens, may aid the Officer if the Officer is involved in a
physical confrontation, or other situation where it is apparent that intervention by
a citizen is necessary to preserve life or limb.
4.The Officer should utilize the Ride-Along time to inform the Observer about the
Police Department and an officer's duties.
5. The Officer will instruct the Observer in proper use of the vehicle seat belts and
ensure that the Observer complies with the officer's instructions. In the event an
Observer does not follow the officer's instruction, the officer will contact their
supervisor and the ride-along may be discontinued.
6. The Officer should instruct the Observer on how to use the radio should the
officer be in need of aid.
7. The Officer should not engage in a pursuit with an Observer in their patrol car.
8. The Officer should not transport a prisoner in the same patrol car being utilized
for the Ride-Along.
V. EMERGENCIES
If there is a known emergency, where it is reasonable to assume that the Observer will be
in danger, the officer will instruct the Observer on exactly what he/she should do. This
could be anything from instructing the O bserver, "Don't get out of the car” to stopping
prior to arrival and having the Observer get out of the car at a safe place and wait for the
officer or another officer. If the Observer is dropped off at a safe location, the officer
will notify ECDC of that location. The Department's objective is to protect people and
property. This includes taking whatever action is necessary to protect the Observer.

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD – 22.19
Page 4 of 4
This General Order superseded all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 6/18/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

