OPD - 22.18
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIF OF POLICE
Index as:
Civil Process Serving
Orders of Protection
Warrants
Subpoenas
___________________________________________________________________________
SERVICE OF LEGAL PROCESS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish policy and procedures regarding criminal and
civil legal process. Nothing stated herein precludes officers from providing necessary assistance
relative to the execution of an official arrest/search warrant.
II. POLICY:
It is the policy of this Department to remain neutral and impartial while providing responsible
and professional service of criminal and civil process, consistent with the lawful authority
granted to members of the Olivette Police Department. Officers are charged with a duty to
ensure that the authority of any criminal or civil process served is valid on its face and to restrict
such process to that of courts with proper jurisdiction. Only sworn, full-time police officers of
the Department are allowed to serve criminal or civil process court orders.
III. DEFINITIONS:
A. Process: Any writ, summons, subpoena, arrest warrant or other process or order of a court.
IV. CIVIL PROCESS SERVING:
A. Members of the Olivette Police Department do not serve documents of civil process, except
for some Ex-Parte Orders and Full Orders of Protection.
B. All persons requesting an officer respond to assist with serving process papers shall be
advised to appear at this Department where the Watch Commander will determine the
manner/extent to which the Department will assist. If a process server refuses to come to the

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 2 of 7
station, an officer and the Watch Commander will be dispatched in an effort to keep the peace.
The following information should be determined:
1. That the person serving the process papers has proper identification.
2. The process papers to be served were issued by a court of law.
3. The reason why assistance is being requested.
C. Officers should not make phone contact with any business or residence for the purpose of
assisting any process server in gaining access to the person named in the papers. Direct phone
contact shall only be made if the Watch Commander feels that it can help resolve/clarify the
situation.
D. At the Watch Commander’s direction, the assigned officer should accompany the process
server to the location in question. Although it is not the officer’s responsibility to address the
person(s) to be served, officers are authorized to assist in establishing the contact. No attempt
should be made by the officers to intimidate or threaten any of the parties involved. Both parties
should be advised that the officer’s presence is simply to “keep the peace.”
E. If the process cannot be served or the situation cannot be resolved because of interference or
obstruction of the civil process, officers should advise the non-complying party that they are
subject to criminal prosecution.
V. CRIMINAL CHARGES RELATED TO CIVIL PROCESS:
A. Officers shall use discretion and seek supervisory direction when considering the method for
pursuing criminal charges against anyone violating the statutes related to civil process. Efforts
should be taken to avoid custodial arrest.
B. Interference with Legal Process (RSMO 575.160)
1. A person commits the crime of interfering with legal process if, knowing any person is
authorized by law to serve process, and/or the purpose of preventing such person from
affecting the service of any process, he/she interferes with or obstructs such person.
2. To commit the crime of Interference with Legal Process, a person must actually
interfere or obstruct the person who is attempting to serve process. Merely avoiding civil
process is not a crime under RSMo 575.160.
C. Refusal to Make an Employee Available for Service of Process (RSMo 575.170)
1. Any employer, or any agent who is in charge of a business establishment, commits the
crime of “Refusing to Make an Employee Available for Service of Process” if he/she
knowingly refuses to assist any officer (authorized by law to serve process) who calls at
such business establishment during the working hours of an employee for the purpose of

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 3 of 7
serving process on such employee, by failing or refusing to make such employee
available for service of process.
2. “Refusing to Make an Employee Available for Service of Process” applies only to the
employer or agent in charge of the business establishment.
VI. ORDERS OF PROTECTION:
A. Generally, Orders of Protection (Ex-Parte Orders & Full Orders) pursuant to Missouri’s Adult
Abuse Act are served by the St. Louis County Sheriff’s Department. However, in some situations
it may be in the best interest of all involved for a sworn, full-time police officer of the
Department to serve a copy of the petition and notice of the date set for the hearing to the
respondent.
B. Olivette officers may serve an Ex-Parte Order or Full Protection Order when:
1. An after-hours Order of Protection has been issued and the respondent is still in
custody.
2. On a call for service and the officer becomes aware that a respondent on an Ex-Parte
Order or Full Order of Protection is present and that individual has not yet been served
with the Order. The officer must have a copy of the Order to provide to the respondent.
The petitioner, if also on the scene, may have the necessary paperwork in his/her
possession.
C. Serving an Order of Protection on a Respondent
1. Missouri law authorizes peace officers to provide personal service to a respondent by
delivering a copy of both the petition and notice of the date set for the hearing, as well as
a copy of any court order if available. Service means providing this information either to
the respondent in person or by leaving a copy of those papers at the dwelling, house, or
usual place of abode of the respondent with some member of the respondent’s family
over the age of fifteen.
2. In order to complete the service process, the officer must complete a “St. Louis Family
Court Officer Return Form” and fax it to the number listed on the form along with copies
of all documents that were served.
3. If the officer is unable to properly complete the service process because of a lack of
necessary documentation, the officer shall still advise the respondent that an Order exists.
4. When the respondent has been served, the serving officer is responsible for completing
the Civil Service Process Log so that the following information is available:
a. Date/Time Order Received

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 4 of 7
b. Type of Legal Process: Civil
c. Nature of Document: Order of Protection
d. Source of Document: i.e.Court of Jurisdiction
e. Name of Petitioner or Respondent
f. Officer Assigned for Service
g. Date of Assignment
h. Court Docket or Case Number
i. Date Service Due/Served:
VII. WARRANTS ISSUED BY OLIVETTE MUNICIPAL COURT:
A. Warrants issued by the Olivette Municipal Court will be activated in the REJIS system. Prior
to filing warrants, the Court Administrator shall:
1. Ensure the record is packed.
2. Review the file for accuracy.
3. Make a copy for the Police Department.
B. Warrants will be filed alphabetically and maintained in a binder in the Holding Facility until
served or cancelled. The warrants are accessible by the Watch Commander 24 hours a day.
VIII. SERVING WARRANTS:
A. Only full-time sworn police officers of the Department are allowed to serve warrants or other
court orders.
B. Officers shall be cognizant of the potential for danger to themselves or others when executing
legal process, especially when serving arrest warrants. All attempts at serving an arrest warrant
shall be completed by at least two officers.
C. When such attempts are made within the City of Olivette, officers shall notify the police
dispatcher of their location and nature of the call. When such attempts are made outside of the
City limits, officers shall ask the dispatcher to notify the local police agency of their location and
the nature of the warrant or action to be taken.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 5 of 7
D. Warrants/POI’s When Subject Lives in Olivette
1. The Watch Commander will assign two officers to serve warrants or to make arrest
attempts on Persons of Interest. The officer(s) shall provide a disposition regarding the
arrest attempt for the CAD system.
2. If it is determined that the suspect no longer lives at the address on the warrant,
officers should make every attempt to develop additional information regarding the
possible location of the suspect and note this information on the warrant/arrest attempt
service form.
3. Notations on warrant/arrest attempts forms shall include the:
a. Date and time service was attempted or executed.
b. Name of officer(s) attempting or executing service.
d. Arrest or reason for non-service.
d. Address of service or attempt.
4. When the subject of an Olivette arrest warrant or POI has been arrested, the arresting
officer is responsible for notifying ECDC to remove the individual from law enforcement
computer systems. A copy of the warrant will be added to the prisoner’s arrest file so
that the following information is available by means of the arrest report and the warrant:
a. Date/Time Warrant Received
b. Type of Legal Process: Criminal
c. Nature of Document: Warrant
d. Source of Document: City of Olivette Municipal Court
e. Name of Defendant
f. Officer Assigned for Service
g. Date of Assignment
h. Court Docket or Reference Number from Warrant
i. Date Service Due: Open Ended

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 6 of 7
E. Federal and State Arrest Warrants Originating from Olivette Incidents
1. Generally, it is the responsibility of the issuing jurisdiction to serve such warrants. If
the subject is in custody at this Department, the individual shall remain in custody until
the warrant can be served.
2. Officers may assist Federal and State agencies by arresting individuals based on
computer warrant information and turning the individual over to the appropriate agency.
F. Warrants from Other Jurisdictions - Arrest warrants or “wanted” entries from other
jurisdictions naming individuals who may live or work in Olivette shall be noted on the
PremierOne Reporting dashboard. Officers should verify the warrant or wanted is valid before
attempting to arrest the subject. If a situation arises where assistance is needed, officers shall not
hesitate to call for additional back-up units.
G. Search Warrants - Search Warrants obtained by members of this Department will generally be
served by the St. Louis County Police Department Tactical Unit unless the object or person to be
searched is in custody.
IX. SUBPOENAS:
A. All subpoenas or other types of legal process not listed above will be directed to the Deputy
Chief where the following information will be logged:
1. Date and time received
2. Type of case, civil or criminal
3. Source of document
4. Name of plaintiff /defendant
5. Officer subpoenaed
6. Court date
7. Court docket number
B. A copy of the subpoena will be filed and the original will be delivered to the officer named on
the subpoena.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD - 22.18
Page 7 of 7
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 4/20/2018
Revised: 12/18/2020
Revised: 1/26/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

