OPD - 22.2
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Rights of Victims and Witnesses
Victim Service Council
________________________________________________________________________
VICTIM AND WITNESS RIGHTS
I. PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this General Order is to familiarize Department personnel with the
rights of the victims of crimes and those who witness crimes.
B. Exposure to crimes as a victim or witness is often a traumatic event in a person’s life.
With that in mind, the Department has adopted the following Rights of Victims and
Witnesses as afforded them by RSMo 595.200.
II. DEFINITIONS:
A. CRIME - An act which would constitute a violation of any criminal statute including
any act which may result in an adjudication of delinquency.
B. VICTIM - A person who suffers direct or threatened physical, emotional or financial
harm as the result of the commission of a crime. The term “victim” also includes the
family members of a minor, incompetent, or a homicide victim.
C. WITNESS - Any person who has been or is expected to be summoned to testify for the
prosecution whether or not any action or proceeding has yet been commenced.
III. RIGHTS OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES:
A. For victims, family members and witnesses, at their request, the right to be informed
by the prosecutor of the final disposition of the case.
B. For victims, family members and witnesses, at their request, the right to be informed
by the appropriate custodial authority whenever the defendant receives a temporary
provisional or final release from custody or whenever the defendant escapes from
custody. Those persons requesting such notice shall provide the appropriate authority
with their current addresses and telephone numbers.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 22.2
Page 2 of 5
C. For victims, the right to appear personally or by counsel, at the sentencing proceeding
and to reasonably express his/her views concerning the seriousness of the crime and the
need for restitution.
D. For victims, the right to be notified of and to appear at any hearing to consider the
parole eligibility of inmates who committed crimes against them and were sentenced to
serve a term within the Department of Corrections, or to offer a written statement in lieu
of personal appearance. It shall be the responsibility of victims to keep the Board of
Probation and Parole informed of their current addresses and telephone numbers.
E. For victims, family members and witnesses, the right to be notified by the prosecuting
attorney, in a timely manner, when a court proceeding to which they have been
summoned will not go on as scheduled.
F. For victims and witnesses, the right to be provided with information by the
prosecuting attorney as to the level of protection available and to receive protection from
the local law enforcement agencies from harm and threats of harm arising out of their
cooperation with law enforcement and prosecution efforts.
G. For victims and witnesses, the right to be informed by the prosecuting attorney of
financial assistance and other social services available to victims or witnesses of a crime,
including information relative to applying for such assistance or service.
H. For victims, the right to be informed by the prosecuting attorney of their right to
request that restitution be an element of the final disposition of the case and to obtain
assistance in the documentation of the victim’s losses.
I. For victims and witnesses, the right to be informed by the court and the prosecuting
attorney of procedures to be followed in order to apply for and receive any witness fee to
which they are entitled.
J. For victims, family members and witnesses, the right to be provided a secure waiting
area or room by the circuit court or prosecuting attorney during court proceedings.
K. For victims, the right to have any personal property that was stolen or taken for
evidentiary purposes, except contraband, property subject to evidentiary analysis, and
property the ownership of which is disputed, returned by the court, the prosecuting
attorney, or law enforcement agencies within ten days of its taking or recovery if it is not
clearly needed for law enforcement or prosecution purposes or as expeditiously as
possible when said property is no longer needed for law enforcement or prosecution
purposes.
L. For victims and witnesses, the right to be provided, when appropriate, with employer
and creditor intercession services by the prosecuting attorney to seek employer
cooperation in minimizing employee’s loss of pay and other benefits resulting from their

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 22.2
Page 3 of 5
participation in the criminal justice process and to seek consideration from creditors if the
victim is unable, temporarily, to continue payments.
M. For victims, family members and witnesses, the right to a prompt disposition of the
case in which they are involved as a victim or a witness.
N. For victims, payment to medical providers for the examination of rape victims and
victims of other crimes (child abuse, incest, sexual assault, etc.) who are not covered by
insurance, Medicare or Medicaid. The following conditions apply:
1. The victims or victim’s guardian consents in writing to the examination;
2. The report of the examination is made for and approved by the attorney
general with the advice of the Department of Health; and
3. The report of the examination is filed by the victim with the prosecuting
attorney of the county in which the alleged incident occurred.
A minor may consent to the examination under the statute. Consent of parent or guardian
is not required for such examination. The hospital or physician making the examination
shall give written notice to the parent or guardian of a minor that such an examination has
taken place.
IV. VICTIM SERVICE COUNCIL
A. The Victim Service Council is a division of the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney. It
offers a full range of assistance to crime victims in St. Louis County. All services are
free of charge. The Victim Service Council offers emotional support and advocacy to
victims who feel traumatized and frightened after a crime occurs. When there has been a
physical injury or financial loss, the Victim Service Council provides assistance in filling
out state victim compensation and insurance forms, and helps in obtaining medical care,
shelter, replacing personal papers, and securing food. Victim Services also notifies
victims of hearings and accompanies them to those proceedings.
B. The Victim Service Council offers information about the criminal justice system,
including police procedures; prosecution and other court related matters. Staff and
volunteers are available to accompany victims to court hearings and provide support and
assistance during the proceedings. The Victim Service Council maintains a victim-
witness waiting room for comfort and privacy.
V. PROCEDURE FOR PROVIDING SERVICE INFORMATION TO VICTIMS AND
WITNESSES:
A. Telephone Referral
The Communications Center will serve as single point of contact for information
concerning the availability of victim/witness services. The directory of victim/witness

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 22.2
Page 4 of 5
resources will be available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis at the Communication Center
to provide resource information to victim/witnesses.
B. Department personnel will take the following actions:
1. Provide the citizen with instructions on how to contact the Department to report
additional information.
2. Determine if the victim would like information on the rights of victims and
witnesses and victim resources/services. If they would like further information,
Department personnel will provide them with contact information.
C. Preliminary Investigation
Officers conducting preliminary investigations shall render the following to the
victim/witnesses:
1. Provide the victim/witness with their name and DSN and the report number as
well as the subsequent steps in the process of the case.
2. Provide a telephone number that the victim/witness may call to report
additional information about the case or to receive information about the status of
the case.
3. Advise the victim/witness about what to do if the suspect or suspect’s
companions or family threatens or otherwise attempts to intimidate him/her.
D. Follow-up Investigation
Officers conducting follow-up investigations will render the following to the
victim/witnesses:
1. Periodically re-contact the victims/witnesses of unusually severe cases to
determine whether needs are being met.
2. Explain to victim/witnesses the procedures involved in the prosecution and
their role in those procedures.
3. If feasible, schedule line ups, interviews, and other required appearances at the
convenience of the victim/witnesses. And, if applicable, provide transportation.
D. Suspect Arrest
Officers, if requested by a victim or witness, will inform the victim/witnesses of the
following:
1. The suspect’s arrest.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 22.2
Page 5 of 5
2. The suspect’s charges.
3. The suspect’s present status along with any warrant or bond status.
VI. SEXUAL ASSAULT SURVIVORS’ BILL OF RIGHTS
A. Pursuant to RSMo 595.201, in addition to other rights as designated by law, sexual
assault survivors are afforded additional rights as cited by the “Sexual Assault Survivors’
Bill of Rights.”
1. A “sexual assault survivor” means any person who is fourteen years of age or
older and who may be a victim of a sexual offense who presents themselves to an
appropriate medical provider, law enforcement officer, prosecuting attorney, or
court.
B. An appropriate medical provider, law enforcement officer, and prosecuting attorney
shall provide the sexual assault survivor with notification of the rights of survivors
pursuant to subsection 2 of Sexual Assault Survivors’ Bill of Rights in a timely manner.
Each appropriate medical provider, law enforcement officer, and prosecuting attorney
shall ensure that the sexual assault survivor has been notified of these rights.
C. Sexual Assault Survivors’ Bill of Rights information is made available
in the Procedures section of PowerDMS with additional information available via the
Missouri Department of Public Safety.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 0630/2009
Revised: 3/13/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/26/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

