OPD – 22.20
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
NALOXONE
NARCAN®
OVERDOSE
NASAL ADMINISTRATION OF NALOXONE
I. PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish procedure for the pre-hospital nasal
administration of naloxone by police officers during an opioid overdose. The objective of
the policy and the use of naloxone is to reduce the number of fatal opioid overdoses.
II. AUTHORITY
Missouri Revised Statute 190.255 provides the authority to law enforcement officers to
administer naloxone to a person suffering from an apparent narcotic or opioid-related
overdose.
III. DEFINITIONS
NALOXONE (NARCAN®) - An antinarcotic drug used to counteract the effects of
narcotic induced impaired breathing, sedation, and lowered blood pressure, whether
caused by narcotics or methadone.
NALOXONE KIT - The equipment and supplies needed to administer naloxone to an
individual experiencing an overdose from an opioid based drug.
OPIOID (Narcotic) - Classification of drugs that act on the central nervous system to
relieve pain with potential for physical and psychological dependence.
OVERDOSE - The consumption of excessive quantities of drugs that is large enough
to be toxic. An overdose may be accidental or deliberate.
IV. PROCEDURES
A. Procedures for Administration
1. Officers of this Department are to be trained in the use of naloxone to reverse

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD – 22.20
Page 2 of 4
the effects of an opioid-related overdose. Naloxone kits will be issued to officers
as part of their first-aid supplies. Officers dispatched to an overdose are strongly
encouraged to bring naloxone kits to the scene.
2. An officer who finds an unconscious and unresponsive individual shall initiate
first aid care within the scope of their training, which may include standard CPR,
and alert EMS if not already dispatched. An officer shall only administer first aid
care, to include administration of naloxone, if in the officer’s opinion it is safe to
do so, considering the scene/situation and condition of the person receiving care.
3. As part of the officer's scene assessment, he or she may find evidence of opioid
overdose, either illicit or legally prescribed, based on call history, paraphernalia
on scene, bystander reports, or physical examination. If the officer makes a good
faith determination of opioid overdose, the patient has signs of inadequate
breathing (less than 8 breaths per minute, agonal breathing, cyanosis), and the
scene is safe to do so, the officer shall proceed with naloxone administration in
conjunction with rescue breathing or full CPR or chest compressions, if no pulse.
a. To administer the naloxone, the officer shall first don gloves and other
available protective gear. The officer will remove the nasal naloxone spray
(NARCAN®) from the kit and peel back the tab. The officer will gently
insert the tip of the nozzle into one nostril and press the plunger firmly to
give the dose of naloxone nasal spray.
b. Continue with rescue breathing or full CPR or chest compressions for 3
to 5 minutes and if there is no response, administer a second dose of
naloxone as before.
c. Continue to monitor breathing and pulse and, if breathing increases and
there is no sign of trauma, place the individual in the recovery position.
d. Continue to monitor the individual and if at any time pulse is lost,
initiate CPR.
e. Officers must stay on scene until the arrival of EMS and provide a
verbal report to EMS personnel of the care provided prior to EMS arrival.
4. At the conclusion of the call, officers shall complete a CARE report
documenting actions taken at the scene and the use of naloxone.
5. In the event of rapid patient resuscitation, the patient may become fully
conscious and may not desire to seek further medical attention at a hospital. In
these cases, officers must ensure that the patient is competent to make the
decision to refuse further medical treatment.
a. In cases where the patient is competent and refuses further medical

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD – 22.20
Page 3 of 4
treatment, officers will witness the patient sign the EMS refusal form and
document the signing in the CARE report.
b. In cases where the officer determines that the patient is not competent,
the officer shall ensure that the patient is taken to a hospital by ambulance.
6. If Officers are presented with a situation where an opportunity to utilize a
privately obtained naloxone kit and no Department kit is readily available, and the
officer believes that the best and highest likelihood of lifesaving success would be
via the use of the privately obtained kit, then the officer may use the privately
obtained kit.
a. Privately obtained kits shall only be used as a last resort when
Department issued kits are not readily available.
b. Use of a privately obtained kit shall be documented in the same fashion
as a Department issued kit.
B. Documentation
1. Officers shall complete a CARE report after the use of naloxone. The report
shall include the following elements:
a. Nature of the call; and
b. Type of opioid suspected (illegal or prescribed); and
c. Indicators present for use of naloxone; and
d. Amount administered; and
e. Medical treatment administered; and
f. Treatment after naloxone administration; and
g. Transfer of care to EMS to include the ambulance unit number and the
paramedics' serial numbers; and
h. Disposal of naloxone spray cartridge.
2. After naloxone is administered, the used naloxone applicator shall be placed
back into its packaging and thrown away. The disposal shall be documented in the
CARE report.
3. After the call for service where naloxone was administered, the officer will
request a replacement through the chain of command.

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD – 22.20
Page 4 of 4
V. ACCOUNTABILITY AND MAINTENANCE OF NALOXONE KITS
A. Naloxone does not tolerate extreme temperatures well and therefore must be stored
near room temperature. Assigned kits shall not be stored in a vehicle for any period
longer than the duration of a single shift. Unassigned kits will be stored in a secure
designated area at the station.
B. Naloxone kits are assigned to trained officers. Assigned kits will be kept under the
control of the assigned officers. Officers shall regularly inspect their issued kit for
damage and ensure the kit is not expired. Officers discovering damage or other problems
shall report the issue to their Watch Commander and take the kit out of service.
C. If the naloxone kit is expired or damaged, a request for a replacement kit will be made
through the chain of command.
VI. TRAINING
A. Only those officers who have received documented training in the use of naloxone
will be authorized to administer the drug.
B. Officers shall receive documented training in the use of naloxone by an approved
training provider. All newly hired patrol officers will receive this training during their
field training program.
C. The training shall, at a minimum, cover the following topics related to naloxone:
1. Risk factors for opioid overdose; and
2. Signs of overdose; and
3. Nasal naloxone use; and
4. Patient care after naloxone use.
This General Order superseded all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 6/3/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

