OPD - 22.3
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Staffing Guidelines
Assignment to Patrol Areas
Rotation and Schedule
Roll Call and Relief Procedures
Officer Deployment
STAFFING
I. PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this General Order is to maintain adequate manpower so that the
Department can continue to function efficiently.
B. The Shift Supervisor is responsible for maintaining adequate platoon manpower to
ensure that all patrol duties can be accomplished.
II. GUIDELINES:
A. Minimum staffing should take into account officers on days off, vacation, schools,
etc. When the two patrol sectors are filled, extra officers shall be used for the at large
position and directed patrol. Minimum staffing indicates the number of personnel that are
expected to report for duty on any particular workday, not necessarily the number of
personnel scheduled to report for duty.
1. The following minimum staffing requirements have been established for the
Bureau of Field Operations (Patrol Division) to ensure adequate coverage and
fulfillment of its mission and objectives.
a. 0600-1800 (1st watch) – no less than three (3) Officers on duty; a
minimum of one (1) Supervisor.
b. 1800-0600 (2nd watch) – no less than three (3) Officers on duty; a
minimum of one (1) Supervisor.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 22.3
Page 2 of 5
2. Officers are available on a 24-hour basis.
a. All Officers are subject to being scheduled “On Call.”
b. Watch Commanders will assign an officer to be on call during his/her
days off in case manpower is needed.
c. Each officer will be on call for a specific day(s). Officers must respond
on duty if called in to work.
3. Exceptions to the previously stated requirements will be at the discretion of the
Shift Supervisor, with the approval of the Chief of Police, and should be limited
to cases involving extenuating circumstances.
4. All Supervisors vacations will be coordinated through the Deputy Chief.
Unless authorized by the Chief of Police, only one Supervisor on a platoon will be
on vacation at a time.
III. ASSIGNMENT TO PATROL AREAS:
A. To provide accountability for law enforcement services in an area, officers will be
assigned to a sector by the Supervisor. In determining assignments, the Shift Supervisor
will consider:
1. Department needs
2. Officer capability and skill
3. Individual shift requirements
4. Patrol assignments should be continuously reviewed by the Shift Commander
and Supervisor to meet the changing needs of the Department.
IV. ROTATION AND SCHEDULE:
Patrol Division officers will be assigned to a rotating shift working either 0600-1800hrs
or 1800-0600hrs. Each squad will work a twelve (12) hour shift. The rotation schedule
will be determined by the Deputy Chief.
V. ROLL CALL AND RELIEF PROCEDURES:
A. On-coming officers will attend roll call unless excused by competent authority. Roll
call will commence for the upcoming tour of duty at 0600 hours for day watch, and 1800
hours for night watch.

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 22.3
Page 3 of 5
B. Roll call will be conducted by the Supervisor and/or the Shift Commander. Roll call
will accomplish at a minimum the following four (4) basic tasks:
1. Briefing officers with information regarding daily patrol activities, also giving
attention to unusual situations and changes in the status of wanted persons, stolen
vehicles, and major investigations.
2. Notifying officers of changes in schedules and assignments.
3. Notifying officers of new directives or changes in directives.
4. Evaluating officers’ readiness to assume patrol.
C. Upon completion of roll call, each officer will then proceed to their assigned vehicle
and inspect it for cleanliness, unreported damage, and all required equipment. Any
discrepancies will immediately be reported to a Supervisor.
D. In order to ensure continuous patrol coverage and availability during shift change,
patrol will begin immediately upon completion of roll call. Off-going officers will be
available for duty until relieved.
VI. OFFICER DEPLOYMENT:
A. Appropriate deployment of officers shall be sent to adequately meet the following
needs:
1. To ensure officer and citizen safety.
2. To adequately and effectively handle multiple tasks at the scene.
3. To keep situations from escalating.
4. To assist with apprehension of suspects.
5. When requested by the officer originally assigned to the call.
B. Calls that require more than one officer to respond may include, but are not limited to:
1. Fleeing suspect.
2. Assault on officers.
3. Homicide.
4. Rapes.

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 22.3
Page 4 of 5
5. Robbery in progress.
6. Burglary in progress.
7. Disturbance.
8. Prowler.
9. Mental case (OBS).
10. Resisting arrest.
11. Alarm soundings (burglar or hold-up).
12. Suspicious autos.
13. Open doors or windows.
14. Auto check.
15. Pedestrian check.
16. On scene felony arrest or violent misdemeanor.
C. When two cars are dispatched, the primary unit shall cancel the assist unit, if not
needed, as soon as feasible.
D. A Supervisor shall respond to all “in progress” calls.
E. If a self initiated stop falls into one of the listed categories, the dispatcher will send an
assist unit unless advised to the contrary by the primary unit.
F. Supervisors will be responsible for assigning appropriate resources to prevent over
response of patrol personnel.
G. Patrol Supervisors will be dispatched to the following types of calls:
1. Homicides/Suspicious deaths/Suicides to include attempts.
2. Rapes.
3. Robberies in progress.
4. Burglaries in progress.
5. Larcenies in progress.

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 22.3
Page 5 of 5
6. Violent OBS cases.
7. Domestic and Violent disturbances.
8. Accidents and/or injuries involving City employees or City property.
9. Incidents involving a deadly response to resistance or aggression.
10. Unusual occurrences, natural or civil disasters.
11. Serious traffic accidents.
12. Crimes of arrests resulting in injury to the officer or suspect.
13. Unusual crimes or incidents.
14. Incidents involving hazardous materials.
15. Major fire scenes.
H. Dispatchers are responsible for ensuring that the on-duty Supervisors are aware of
such calls.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/19/2008
Revised: 1/23/2012
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 6/13/2018
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 11/24/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

