OPD – 22.8
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Employee Injuries
Release for Duty
Line of Duty Serious Injury
Line of Duty Death
Felonious Death
Critical Incident Counseling
________________________________________________________________________
EMPLOYEE INJURY OR LINE OF DUTY DEATH
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of the policy is to establish procedures to be taken regarding employees who
sustain injuries while working. This policy also establishes procedures to ensure
appropriate support and assistance is provided to family members and coworkers of
Department employees following a serious injury or line of duty death.
II. EMPLOYEE INJURIES:
A. When an employee is injured on the job, the Report of Injury Form #WC-1-EDI
concerning the injury must be forwarded to the Chief of Police by the next working
weekday (Monday, if the injury occurred on a weekend). Failure to comply with this
requirement could result in a loss of benefits. If a formal police report is made, the
Report of Injury Form must still be completed and attached to the report.
B. A formal police report is not necessary if the employee is injured on duty, unless it is
incidental to an arrest or some other incident normally requiring a police report.
C. The Report of Injury Form will describe the incident in detail, including names and
address of witnesses. Use the Department address for the employee’s home address.
When an employee is injured on duty, and medical treatment is not required, the
supervisor should include the statement, “no medical treatment required or sought at this
time.” The employee must then sign the form after this statement.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 2 of 7
D. A Vehicle Accident Report will be filled out if applicable.
E. The time of injury (whether seeking medical attention or not), time the employee
returned to work or if the employee was sent home, should be indicated in the report.
F. The supervisor on duty when the injury occurred is responsible for ensuring that all
necessary reports are completed and forwarded in a timely manner.
G. Photographs are required whenever a vehicle accident occurs. Take photographs for
injuries, if necessary. For example, conditions of steps, sidewalks, chairs, etc.
H. When an employee sustains an on-duty injury and requests medical attention, he/she
may be examined by Olivette Fire Department paramedics. If further medical treatment
is required, the employee should be transported to an appropriate medical facility.
I. The originals of any correspondence or other paperwork concerning the injury,
received by an employee should be forwarded to the Deputy Chief.
III. FOLLOW-UP CARE:
Employees will be treated by a doctor, selected by the City, if follow-up care is needed.
The City Manager’s office will advise the name of a physician or clinic.
IV. RELEASE FOR DUTY:
An employee who must be off duty due to an injury on the job must submit a written
statement from a qualified physician releasing the employee to return to full duty.
V. DEFECTIVE EQUIPMENT:
If an accident/injury is caused by suspected defective equipment, the supervisor will take
the equipment out of service and hold it for later examination.
VI. LINE OF DUTY SERIOUS INJURY OR DEATH:
The Olivette Police Department will provide all possible support to the families and co-
workers of an employee who becomes seriously ill, injured, or die while in the line of
duty.
VII. SERIOUS PERSONAL INCIDENT IN THE LINE OF DUTY NOTIFICATIONS:
A. The immediate Shift Commander/Supervisor will make notification through the chain
of command to the Chief of Police.
B. The Office of the Chief of Police, upon notification will:

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 3 of 7
1. Determine the need for notification of other affected personnel, sections, or
units for support and assistance;
2. Review the employee’s personnel records and prepare for notification of the
immediate family; and
3. Ensure all available information relating to the incident is accurate and
forwarded as soon as possible to the employee’s family. Notification will be
made:
a. In person by an employee designated by the Chief of Police.
b. To expedite the process, notification may be made by a command level
officer (if possible) of the law enforcement agency serving the jurisdiction
in which the family resides, works, etc with the approval of the Chief of
Police. The notifying agency will be provided all the details concerning
the incident and will be asked to confirm the notification and advise this
Department if contact was not made.
VIII. DEPARTMENT ASSISTANCE IN THE CASE OF EMPLOYEE DEATH IN THE
LINE OF DUTY:
A. The ranking police official at the hospital will:
1. At the convenience of the hospital staff, secure two (2) rooms; one room for
use by the bereaved family members, and one for use by Department personnel;
2. Ensure that the assembled groups are briefed and updated on the events as
soon as possible.
3. If consistent with the family’s wishes, secure the presence of a member of the
clergy.
4. Assign a liaison to the immediate family to ensure that all Department
assistance is made available.
5. The liaison will be detached to the Office of the Chief of Police and shall;
a. Act as the Department’s contact with the immediate family,
coordinating the services of the Department with the wishes of the family.
The liaison should be available to the family at all times for at least the
first week following the incident.
b. Ensure that all information concerning the details and events of the
incident are accurate and are shared with the family in a sensitive and
dignified manner.

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 4 of 7
c. Arrange transportation for the immediate family to and from the
hospital.
d. Request that special police attention be directed to the family’s
residence(s).
e. If the death is a result of a felonious act, advise the immediate family
that personal property on the deceased employee’s person at the time of
the death may be required to further prosecution, but all steps will be taken
to return the property as soon as practical.
f. Have the employee’s personal property collected from lockers and work
areas and returned to the family. Any items of property having no
intrinsic value that may tend to exacerbate the family’s grief will be held
in the Evidence Locker as determined by the Chief of Police.
g. Assist with travel or lodging information and arrangements for out-of-
town family.
h. Assist the immediate family with all funeral and memorial
arrangements, if requested.
i. Make arrangements for an Honor Guard and Funeral Escort, if desired
by the immediate family.
j. Advise the immediate family that a representative from the City will be
contacting them to explain benefits and/or compensation due them.
k. Ensure the full services of other resources are made available to the
immediate family.
l. Implement the assistance of Department volunteers who wish to assist
the immediate family with additional needs such as transportation, food
and meal preparation, childcare, or house sitting.
m. Make available the services of the Department’s Police Chaplains; and
n. Contact the immediate family at appropriate intervals following the
funeral to ensure applicable compensation has been received.
B. If the completion of the following tasks warrants it, the liaison’s detachment to the
Office of the Chief of Police may be extended or resumed:
1. Monitor the defendant’s process through the judicial system and keep the
immediate family informed of all pending legal proceedings.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 5 of 7
2. Encourage family attendance at the judicial proceedings and accompany the
family. The liaison will provide transportation to the immediate family if needed;
and
3. Explain the rights of the immediate family as victims, including access to
benefits from the Missouri Compensation for Victims of Crime Fund.
C. The Office of the Chief of Police may authorize the following:
1. The wearing of the Department uniform for burial, if the family so desires.
2. The wearing of the black mourning band from the time of death through the
day of the funeral;
3. Request that the National and other flags flown over the City of Olivette
Government facilities be lowered to half-staff from the time of death through the
tenth (10th) day following the funeral;
4. Designate an officer to coordinate any responses or responding units from
other agencies. It will be this officer’s responsibility to record the names and
address of the responding agencies and to assist the family with appropriate
acknowledgments. Any participation in the funeral ceremonies by these agencies
will be coordinated at a location determined to be suitable by the officer, and
contact information will be listed detailing the funeral arrangements; and
5. Prepare condolence cards for issuance to all members of the immediate family
and as appropriate and in accordance with the family’s wishes, send flowers or
donations to named charities.
D. At the memorial, funeral, and interment services, the Department may:
1. Provide transportation for immediate family members in need of
transportation.
2. Aid in finding childcare, ensure special attention is given to family
residence(s) and address any other family needs (e.g. elderly or handicapped
family members).
3. Provide the services for an Honor Guard, Color Guard, pallbearers, funeral
escort, et cetera, as appropriate and in accordance with the wishes of the family;
and
4. Provide security services at each facility if such action is warranted under the
circumstances of the incident.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 6 of 7
IX. ASSISTANCE IN THE CASE OF FELONIOUS DEATH:
The Department will provide its support to the immediate family by authorizing
employees designated by the Chief of Police to accompany family members to any court
proceedings concerning the incident.
The Commander of the Bureau of Investigations and a member of the Prosecuting
Attorney’s team, if possible, will at their earliest convenience, follow the trial, meet with
the immediate family to explain the case, and answer any questions or concerns the
family may have.
X. CRITICAL INCIDENT COUNSELING:
A. The death or serious injury of an employee while on duty has a profound emotional
effect on the employee’s co-workers. In some instances, the effect may be devastating.
The Department fully recognizes its obligation to tend to the needs of employees closely
associated with the victim employee.
B. The Chief of Police, or his designate, will ensure the Police Chaplains are notified of
the incident, and will ensure that;
1. All immediate co-workers of the employee are contacted by a Police Chaplain
and are offered counseling and grief management information.
2. Police Chaplains will also be utilized to provide critical incident counseling on
a group basis for other co-workers who feel the need to seek assistance in dealing
with the trauma.
XI. BLUE ALERT
A. Blue Alerts provide for rapid dissemination of information to law enforcement
agencies, media, and the public about violent offenders who have killed, seriously
injured, or pose an imminent and credible threat to law enforcement. Blue Alerts can be
transmitted via wireless devices and through the Emergency Alert System (EAS).
B. A Blue Alert is authorized when (RSMo 650.520):
1. A law enforcement officer is killed or seriously injured in the line of duty; or
2. An officer is missing in connection with official duties; or
3. There is an imminent and credible threat to kill or seriously injure a law
enforcement officer; and
4. There is actionable information known about a suspect for a public notification
to be helpful to law enforcement; and

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD – 22.8
Page 7 of 7
5. The law enforcement agency involved requests or approves the alert being
issued
C. Procedures to initiate a Blue Alert:
1. Once the Shift Commander has determined the criteria is sufficient for
activation, fill out the Blue Alert form available from the Missouri State Highway
Patrol.
2. Email (moalerts@mshp.dps.mo.gov) or fax (573-751-6814) the Blue Alert
form with the attachments such as photographs, area maps, etc. to the Missouri
State Highway Patrol; Troop F Headquarters. Email is the preferred method to
receive the forms.
3. Contact the Missouri State Highway Patrol; Troop F Headquarters at (573)-
751-1000 to verify the emailed or faxed forms and attachments have been
received.
4. Inform ECDC Dispatchers/Call takers that a Blue Alert has been activated and
to prepare for increased call volume associated with the alert.
D. Cancellation
1. Mark the Blue Alert form with "Cancellation" and provide a brief description
of the cancellation details in the "Brief Circumstances" box.
2. Email (moalerts@mshp.dps.mo.gov) or fax (573-751-6814) the form to the
Missouri State Highway Patrol; Troop F Headquarters. Call the Missouri State
Highway Patrol's Troop F Headquarters at 573-751-1000 to verify the form was
received for the cancellation request.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 6/15/2023
Revised: 2/10/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

