OPD – 22.9
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Emergency Staff Notification
Notification Process
Incidents Requiring Notification
Notification Matrix
EMERGENCY STAFF NOTIFICATION
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to define the responsibilities of police personnel
regarding actions and notifications to be taken during emergency situations or when
noteworthy actions dictate that the Chief of Police and/or other staff officers be notified.
It is the policy of this Department to make proper notification to designated personnel in
a variety of emergencies or noteworthy incidents.
II. PROCEDURE:
A. Whenever an emergency or incident described on the notification matrix occurs,
notifications will be made as follows:
1. The responding officer will notify the Watch Commander.
2. The Watch Commander shall respond to the scene and assess the situation.
3. The Watch Commander will determine whether additional notifications are
required and will:
a. Make the appropriate notifications, or
b. Assign Department personnel to make the appropriate notifications, or
c. Contact Dispatch and advise Dispatch to make the appropriate
notifications.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD – 22.9
Page 2 of 7
4. The person making the notification shall make note of the time the notification
is made and shall advise the Watch Commander when notifications cannot be
made.
B. The Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, or the Watch Commander will notify the City
Manager in a timely manner when deemed necessary.
C. Since it is impossible to cover all situations on the notification matrix, it is to be used
as a guide only. Anytime a Watch Commander feels that another member of this
Department needs to be notified of an incident, he/she should make the notification. It is
imperative that the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, City Manager, and City Officials are
aware of certain incidents occurring within the City.
III. NOTIFICATION PROCESS:
A. To Notify Personnel On-Duty:
1. Attempt to contact by calling the individual’s phone extension. If no contact,
2. Attempt to contact through mobile phone, if available. If no contact,
3. Notify communications to attempt to contact via radio.
B. To Notify Personnel Off-Duty:
1. Call the individual’s primary contact phone number. If no contact,
2. Attempt to contact through secondary phone number, if available. If no
contact,
3. Recall individual’s primary contact phone number.
IV. INCIDENTS REQUIRING NOTIFICATION:
A. Code 1000, Major Case Squad, Accident Reconstruction
B. Significant Felony Crimes
C. Disaster
D. Hazardous Materials Incident
E. Homicide/Suspicious Death, Suicide/Suspicious Death, Accidental Death/Serious
Injury
F. Serious and/or Fatal Traffic Accident

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD – 22.9
Page 3 of 7
G. Major News Item and/or Significant Event
H. Hostage/Barricaded Subject
I. Response to Resistance or Aggression resulting in Death or Substantial Bodily Harm
J. Officer Weapon Discharge (Other than approved for training)
K. Vehicle Pursuits
L. Prisoner Escape
M. Search Warrant and/or Raid in Our Venue by Any Department
N. Any Accident or Injury Involving On-Duty Department Personnel
O. Off-Duty Incidents Involving Department Personnel
P. Incidents Involving City Officials
Q. Missing Person
R. Missing/Runaway Juveniles
S. Sex Abuse – Victim 16 Years Old or Younger
T. Physical Abuse with Serious Physical Injury or if there is documented abuse history -
Victim 16 Years Old or Younger
U. Domestic Violence Resulting in Felony Assault Where Subject is NOT in Custody
V. Abuse of Elderly Perpetrated by Any Caretaker of the Victim
W. Serious Citizen Complaint
X. Extended Road Closures
Y. Major Power Outages
Z. Significant Public Safety Building Issues or Equipment Problems

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD – 22.9
Page 4 of 7
V. EMERGENCY AND ESSENTIAL OUTSIDE AGENCIES
A. In many emergency situations, assistance from outside agencies may be required.
Officers must be aware of this and notify such agencies or persons as are appropriate to
the situation.
B. The Olivette Police Department will accept and deliver emergency messages and
notifications when and where required under the following conditions:
1. The message involves death, serious injury, missing person, welfare concern or
other legitimate law enforcement purpose.
2. When an incident occurs within the geographical boundaries of Olivette and
notification requires contact with someone within or outside of our jurisdiction.
3. When another agency requests that this Department make an emergency
notification within our jurisdiction:
a. Officers will make notification to another party only after the officer
has contacted the requesting agency for verification of the request and
clarification of the details of the message, and the information has been
reviewed by a supervisor.
C. Fire Department / Medical Personnel Notifications
1. Upon arrival at the scene of an incident in which injuries, fire hazards, or other
hazardous conditions exist which will require the fire department and/or
emergency medical service personnel, the responding officer will immediately
advise Communications to contact the appropriate agency and provide the
following:
a. Location;
b. Type of hazard / incident;
c. Type of injuries, if applicable;
d. Extent of fire and/or hazard, if applicable;
e. Any other pertinent information which will aid in the Fire/EMS
response.
2. Communications will in turn immediately dispatch the Olivette Fire
Department or other available fire and medical unit as available.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD – 22.9
Page 5 of 7
3. If a police report is generated, the reporting officer will document the names of
those fire and medical personnel who respond.
D. Street / Highway Department and/or Public Utility Notifications
1. Officers who encounter potential or actual hazards on the roadway that require
notification of a public utility will notify Communications and provide the
following information:
a. Location;
b. Type of hazard;
c. Nature of response required; and
d. The agency or company that has jurisdiction, if known.
2. Communications will in turn notify the proper street and/or highway
department and provide an estimated time of arrival to the reporting officer(s).
E. Tactical Unit Notifications
1. If tactical units or hostage negotiators are required, the on-duty supervisor will
make or have made the appropriate Department notifications and obtain
authorization from the Chief of Police or his/her designee to request their
response.
2. If authorized by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, Communications will
contact the appropriate agency and provide to them all pertinent information
regarding the circumstances.
a. Communications will then provide the requesting officer with an
estimated time of arrival of the tactical unit or hostage negotiator.
F. Medical Examiner Notifications
1. When the need arises to contact the St. Louis County Medical Examiner’s
Office, officers will obtain authorization from the on-duty supervisor. The officer
will then contact the Medical Examiner and explain the circumstances on the
incident.
a. The Medical Examiner will ask a series of questions regarding the
deceased and determine the action to be taken (e.g., body to remain
undisturbed pending further investigation; body to be retrieved by medical
examiner for further investigation; body to be released; etc.).

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD – 22.9
Page 6 of 7
b. Officers will follow the direction of the Medical Examiner.
2. If officers are unable to contact the Medical Examiner’s office, they will
contact Communications, who will in turn contact the medical examiner’s office
and relay all pertinent information.
3. Contact with the Medical Examiner will be documented in the police report, if
applicable.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/29/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 3/20/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 7/10/2020
Revised: 11/24/2021
Revised: 1/26/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 7 --

A - Always Notify
D - Notify if On-Duty
X - Notify in Timely Manner
C.M. - City Manager (Could be
Delegated)
P.D. Police Will Notify
Y- Notify Immediately	
Chief of Police	
Deputy Chief
Commander In
vestigations
Commander of Patrol	
Super
visor of Patrol
Detective
Juvenile Office
r
Accident Reconstruction
ist
ECDC
 Dispatch
Fire Department	
All Police Officers
All Personnel	
City Manager
Council Members
Relevant General
Orders
Callout for Code 1000 Y Y Y D Y Y D X OPD – 26.1
Callout for MRT Y Y Y D Y Y D X
Callout for Major Case Squad Y Y Y D Y Y Y Y D Y C.M OPD – 2.1
Callout for Accident Reconstructions Y Y Y D Y Y Y Y Y D X OPD – 21.4
Significant Felony Crimes *** A A A D Y D A D
Disaster Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y C.M OPD – 26.1
Hazardous Materials Incident A A D D Y D Y Y D A C.M. OPD – 21.4
Homicide/Suspicious Deaths Y Y Y D Y Y Y Y D X C.M.
Suicide/Suspicious Deaths A A A D Y A Y Y D X C.M.
Accidental Death/Serious Injury A A A D Y A Y Y D
Serious and/or Fatal Traffic Accident Y Y Y D Y D Y Y Y D X C.M. OPD – 21.4
Major News Item and/or Significant Event A A A D Y D Y D X C.M. OPD – 31.2
Hostage/Barricaded Subject Y Y Y D Y Y Y Y D Y C.M.
Response to Resistance or Aggression
resulting in Death or Substantial Bodily Harm Y Y Y D Y Y Y Y D Y C.M. OPD – 9.1
Officer Weapon Discharge (Other than
approved for training) Y Y A D Y D A X C.M. OPD – 9.4
Vehicular Pursuits A A D D Y D Y D OPD – 19.5
Prisoner Escape Y Y A D Y A Y D X CM OPD – 34.1
Search Warrant and/or Raid in Our Venue
by ANY Department A A A D Y D A D OPD – 23.8
Any Accident or Injury Involving On-Duty
Department Personnel Y Y A D Y D A X OPD – 22.8
Accidents/Injuries Involving On-Duty City
Employees or City Vehicles Y Y A D Y D A X OPD – 19.3 &
OPD – 15.4
Off-Duty Incidents Involving Department
Personnel Y Y A D Y D X OPD – 26.3
Incidents Involving City Officials Y Y D D Y D Y C.M.
Missing Person D D D D Y D Y D D OPD – 32.2
Missing/Runaway Juvenile D D D D Y D D Y D D OPD – 32.2
Sex Abuse - Victim 16 Years Old or Younger Y Y A D Y D A A OPD – 25.1
Victim 16 Years Old or Younger - Physical
Abuse with Serious Physical Injury or if there
is documented abuse history
A A A D Y D A A OPD – 25.1
Domestic Violence Resulting in Felony
Assault Where Suspect is NOT in Custody A A A D Y D A D OPD – 39.2
Abuse of Elderly Perpetrated by Any
Caretaker of the Victim D D D D Y D A
Serious Citizen Complaint A A A D Y D A OPD – 30.1
Extended Road Closures Y Y D D Y D A A D D X C.M.
Major Power Outages A A D D Y D A A D D X C.M.
Significant Public Safety Building Issues or
Equipment Problems A A D D Y D A A D D X

-- 7 of 7 --

