OPD - 23.10
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Follow-Up Investigations
FOLLOW-UP INVESTIGATIONS
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for follow-up
investigations.
II. FOLLOW-UP INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Follow-up investigations are conducted, normally, by Detectives assigned to the
Bureau of Investigation. The following procedures are offered as a guide towards
conducting follow-up investigations.
B. It shall be the duty of the Detective(s) to read, review and analyze all previous reports
prepared during the preliminary investigation, and obtain results from laboratory
examinations, if needed.
C. The Detective(s) will make arrangements to conduct any additional interviews of the
victims or witnesses and to interrogate those who may be suspects in the case.
D. The Detective(s) should contact personnel who may have been at the crime scene, or
completed supplemental reports, to assure that as much information as possible is
obtained.
E. The Detective(s) may preserve the crime scene and preserve evidence. Should the
crime scene dictate, the Detective(s) should organize searches to locate physical
evidence. Searches requiring overtime personnel or other extensive resources will be
approved by the Chief of Police.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the Detective(s) to make every effort to identify and
apprehend the suspect(s) responsible for the commission of the crime being investigated.
Upon development of a suspect, the Detective(s) should also determine if the individual
is a suspect in any other crimes in Olivette, and secondly, if the individual is a suspect in
a crime in another jurisdiction. The suspect’s criminal history should be checked to
determine involvement in similar type cases in the area.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 23.10
Page 2 of 2
G. Should a suspect be identified from reports, interviews, review of evidence, or
witnesses the Detective(s) shall prepare a case for presentation to the prosecutor. Prior to
presentation, the case will be reviewed and approved by the Commander of the Bureau of
Investigations for completeness and accuracy.
H. At the conclusion of the investigation, the victim will be advised of the disposition.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

