OPD - 23.14
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Criminal Intelligence
CRIMINAL INTELLIGENCE
I. POLICY
It shall be the policy of this Department to collect, evaluate, and disseminate criminal
intelligence information as a function of basic criminal investigations. Department
personnel will forward criminal intelligence information to the Bureau of Investigations.
Detectives assigned to the Bureau of Investigations will be responsible for intelligence
operations and will conduct same in strict accordance with all applicable federal and state
laws.
II. PURPOSE
The purpose of this general order is to establish procedures regarding the use of criminal
intelligence information as it pertains to criminal investigation and Homeland Security.
The following procedures shall be adhered to in all phases of intelligence operations.
III. DEFINITIONS
Criminal Intelligence- Information gathered, collated, analyzed, reported, recorded and
disseminated by law enforcement agencies concerning types of crime, identified
criminals and known or suspected criminal groups. This information may pertain to
traditional criminal activity, including but not limited to murder, rape, robbery, burglary,
larceny, property damage, vice, drugs, organized crime, terrorism, and Homeland
Security. Information concerning political, religious, racial, or personal beliefs shall not
be collected unless such information is deemed relevant to criminal activity that presents
a direct threat to the community.
IV. DOCUMENTING AND REPORTING INFORMATION
A. All Department personnel, regardless of their jobs, have a role in criminal intelligence
and the sharing of information. Personnel shall receive training in documenting
information gathered during the course of performing their job duties and the process for
reporting the information to the Bureau of Investigations Supervisor.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 23.14
Page 2 of 5
B. The collection of criminal intelligence information shall be based on a reasonable and
legal need. It shall be limited to criminal conduct, and activities that pose a threat to the
community.
V. INFORMATION SOURCES
A. The Bureau of Investigations is responsible for compiling intelligence information
from a variety of sources. Information received via confidential informants, surveillance
operations, uniformed patrol, intelligence records, field interviews, computer generated
studies, criminal exchange meetings, and other law enforcement agencies may be
included in the intelligence system.
B. If a confidential informant is the source of intelligence information, the procedures
outlined in OPD - 23.5 "Confidential Informants" shall apply.
VI. ADMINISTRATION OF INTELLIGENCE INFORMATION
A. Intelligence information is an important asset to effective police operations and shall
be administered in a manner designed to improve the effectiveness of the Bureau of
Investigations
.
B. Supervisory Oversight
1. The Bureau of Investigations Supervisor will review incoming intelligence
information and upon evaluating it, shall determine if the information warrants the
creation of an intelligence file.
2. The Bureau of Investigations Supervisor will oversee the compilation of all
intelligence files and will ensure that, whenever possible, the files are cross-
referenced and detail actual or potential relationships.
3. Once an intelligence file has been created, the Bureau of Investigations
Supervisor is responsible for its storage and safekeeping.
4. The Bureau of Investigations Supervisor shall review and validate the
intelligence information before its dissemination to other law enforcement
officers or agencies. Mug shots and copies of incident reports distributed to other
law enforcement agencies are not considered intelligence information per se and
are exempt from these provisions.
C. Dissemination of Information
1. Intelligence information of a less than sensitive nature may be distributed
during roll call sessions, via confidential bulletins, or criminal exchange meetings.
2. All requests for more sensitive intelligence information will be directed to the

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 23.14
Page 3 of 5
Bureau of Investigations Supervisor. The requests may be sent via phone, FAX,
mail, electronic messaging, or personal contact.
3. In each case, the individual placing a request for information must provide
proper identification, the reason for the request and specify the nature of his/her
investigation. Once the Bureau of Investigations Supervisor verifies the identity
of the requester and determines that the release of such information is necessary,
the requested information may be released.
4. Requests shall be denied whenever one or more of the following circumstances
exists:
a. The requester lacks the legal credentials to receive such information
b. The requester fails to display an outstanding need
c. The requester's reliability or honesty is questionable
d. The request is not made through proper channels (e.g. placed with an
employee who lacks the proper authority to release the information)
e. The release of requested information would potentially compromise a
confidential source
f. The requested information has not been evaluated for accuracy and
reliability
D. Integrity of Intelligence Files
1. Active intelligence files shall be identified by entries in a log maintained by the
Bureau of Investigations Supervisor.
2. Intelligence files shall be reviewed annually for the purpose of identifying
information that is out of date, incorrect, or no longer serves a useful purpose.
Such files shall be purged from the system and destroyed in accordance with the
Police Records Retention Schedule as provided by the Secretary of State. The
Bureau of Investigations Supervisor will oversee the destruction of obsolete
intelligence files and will ensure that at least one other witness is present at the
time confidential material is destroyed.
3. The Investigations Supervisor will also initiate an entry into the file log book
for each intelligence file removed for destruction.

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 23.14
Page 4 of 5
VII. SAFEGUARDING, SECURING, AND STORING INFORMATION
A. Due to their sensitive nature, intelligence files shall be maintained separately from
other agency records to prevent compromising the integrity of the intelligence process.
Intelligence files shall be stored in a separate locked file drawer(s) under the direct
control of the Bureau of Investigations Supervisor. Access to the information contained
therein shall be restricted to the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, and the Bureau of
Investigations Supervisor.
B. Information contained in intelligence files shall be disseminated to Department
personnel and/or other criminal agencies strictly on a "need-to-know" basis and only after
appropriate verification measures have been satisfied.
VIII. OPERATIONAL DEPLOYMENT
A. The Chief of Police must approve all intelligence operations prior to personnel and
resources being committed to a mission.
B. Intelligence operations shall be carefully planned with clearly defined objectives.
Personnel shall be thoroughly briefed prior to deployment and all necessary equipment
tested.
C. When possible, personnel shall be deployed in groups of two law enforcement
officers. However, should circumstances dictate otherwise, arrangements shall be made
to position assistance in as close proximity to the intelligence operation as practical.
Dispatch and the Watch Commander will be notified of each specific operation. The
Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief shall be informed as soon as possible of any major
incident related to an ongoing intelligence operation.
D. If an intelligence operation leads outside of the jurisdictional boundaries of the City,
the Bureau of Investigations Supervisor will contact the appropriate law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction over the area. In the event that no direct enforcement action is
planned or anticipated, such notification may be delayed with the permission of the
Bureau of Investigations Supervisor until the situation warrants contact with the proper
authorities.
IX. EQUIPMENT
A. Members of the Bureau of Investigations shall receive periodic training in the proper
usage of surveillance equipment and the administration of intelligence information to
ensure full compliance with legal requirements and the security procedures established by
the Department.
B. Surveillance equipment shall be stored in the Bureau of Investigations storage room.
Surveillance equipment will be properly maintained at all times and periodically
inspected for operational readiness. Should a surveillance operation be conducted, the use

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 23.14
Page 5 of 5
of such specialized equipment will be properly documented in Department records at the
conclusion of the mission.
X. ANNUAL REVIEW
A. The Bureau of Investigations Supervisor shall conduct an annual review of all
processes and procedures associated with the Department's intelligence function. The
review shall be documented in a written report to the Chief of Police.
B. Elements of the report shall include information pertaining to:
1. The number of files added, purged, and deleted
2. Adherence to security and safeguarding procedures
3. Dissemination of intelligence information
4. Any related training needs or recommendations, if applicable.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 4/20/2018
Revised: 10/26/2020
Revised: 2/23/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

