OPD - 23.13
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Covert Operations
Drug Investigations
Organized Crime
Vice
VICE, DRUG AND ORGANIZED CRIME INVESTIGATIONS
I. POLICY
It shall be the policy of this Department to investigate complaints regarding vice, drug
and organized crime activities. As outlined in this policy, Officers assigned to the Bureau
of Investigations shall be responsible for developing intelligence information and
providing liaison activities, as necessary. Control of such investigations may be
relinquished to other law enforcement agencies if the investigation exceeds the
capabilities of the Department.
II. PURPOSE
This General Order shall establish procedures regarding the conduct of vice, drug, and
organized crime investigations within the City of Olivette.
III. DEFINITIONS
Conspiracy - An agreement, culminating in an overt act, between two or more people to
commit a crime.
Distribution of Drugs - Delivering controlled substance in a manner other than by
legally administering or dispensing.
Manufacture of Drugs - The production, preparation, compounding, or processing of
drug paraphernalia, or of a controlled substance, or an imitation controlled substance,
either directly or by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by
means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis,
to include the packaging of same.

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 23.13
Page 2 of 6
Organized Crime - A formal organization designed and operated to carry out criminal
activity.
Vice - Criminal activities designed to exploit human weakness regarding immoral
conduct (e.g., Prostitution, illegal gambling etc.).
IV. VICE, DRUG, ORGANIZED CRIME COMPLAINTS
A. There are no specialized units within the Bureau of Investigations assigned to
investigate vice, drug, or organized crime complaints. Detectives assigned to the Bureau
of Investigations shall investigate complaints of this nature in the same manner as other
cases.
B. Receipt of Complaints
1. Information regarding vice, drug or organized crime activities may be received
or initiated by various Departmental components (Patrol, Dispatch, or
Investigations). When practical, such complaints shall be referred directly to the
Investigations Supervisor who shall then assign a Detective to conduct a
preliminary investigation to establish the validity of the complaint.
2. If the complaint is brought to the attention of a Patrol Officer, the officer shall
obtain as much information as possible to include:
a. Reporting party's name and contact information
b. Nature of the complaint
c. Suspect information (if known)
3. The complainant will then be advised that the information will be forwarded to
the Investigations Supervisor for further investigative action.
C. Record of Complaints
1. Once the initial information has been obtained, the receiving officer shall
attempt to verify as much of the information as possible. Verification may be
made through the following sources:
a. Department files and records
b. REJIS inquiries
c. DOR inquiries
d. City licenses/records

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 23.13
Page 3 of 6
e. Field Interview reports
f. Intelligence data
2. The information obtained shall be documented in an e-mail to the
Investigations Supervisor, the Deputy Chief, and the Chief of Police. The Chief of
Police must grant approval for the commitment of resources to pursue the
investigation or for the investigation to be relinquished to another agency.
3. If the information is determined to be valid and a criminal investigation is
warranted, the case information shall be documented in a CARE report. Sensitive
information shall be retained within the confines of the Bureau of Investigations
and not be included in the report.
D. Record of Intelligence Information - Information received from outside agencies
regarding vice, drug, or organized crime complaints shall generally be treated as
intelligence information and shall be handled in compliance with OPD - 23.14 “Criminal
Intelligence”.
V. PROTECTED FILE SYSTEM
A. Sensitive records which may jeopardize officer safety, current undercover
investigations, informants, or intelligence sources shall be issued a case file number in a
manner consistent with other incident reports.
1. Sensitive records shall be filed in a secure area under the Investigations
Supervisor's control, with access limited to the Chief of Police, the Investigations
Supervisor, Deputy Chief, and those Detective(s) actively involved in the
investigation.
2. Once basic report data has been entered into the Department's computer
system, investigative reports, intelligence material and other supporting forms and
documentation shall be maintained in a separate file controlled by the
Investigations Supervisor.
B. At the conclusion of an investigation or at the time the Department relinquishes
investigative control to another agency, documentation contained in a protected file (with
the exception of intelligence and/or informant information) shall be returned to the
central file system.
VI. CONFIDENTIAL FUND
A. Payments to informants will be authorized by the Chief of Police, after a
memorandum has been prepared requesting such funding and forwarded through the

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 23.13
Page 4 of 6
chain of command. Informant payments will be from the City’s petty cash fund
maintained by the Finance Department.
B. The Investigations Supervisor shall maintain separate records of expenditures to
include: reason for expenditure, corresponding control number, date and amount of
expenditure.
C. Receipts of Expenditures - As feasible, personnel responsible for the expenditure of
confidential informant funds shall obtain a payment receipt regarding each transaction.
The receipt shall then be forwarded to the Finance Director for accounting purposes. The
Investigations Supervisor will retain a copy of the receipt for the file.
VII. COVERT OPERATIONS
A. Due to personnel and resource considerations, the Department shall generally
relinquish responsibility to conduct covert operations (e.g. investigation into the
manufacture and distribution of drugs, organized crime rings, etc.) to those agencies more
readily equipped to pursue the investigation. The St. Louis County Multi-Jurisdictional
Task Force, DEA, FBI, and the St. Louis County Intelligence Unit are generally the
agencies that would handle covert operations regarding organized crime or drug
operations.
B. If it is determined the investigation shall be conducted by this Department, the
Chief of Police must grant approval for the commitment of Department personnel and
resources. The Investigations Supervisor shall then coordinate all internal covert
operations which are conducted by this Department. Specific planning and management
tasks shall include:
1. Selection of operational/support personnel
2. Familiarizing personnel with mission objectives and target area(s)
3. Determining procedures for observation, high-risk entries, and arrests
4. Ensuring operational funds are adequate to meet expense needs
5. Establishing a system of communications
6. Selecting and/or approving operational equipment needs, and ensuring that
necessary resources are available
7. Ensuring mission confidentiality and security
8. Providing false identification/cover stories as necessary
9. Ensuring adequate levels of supervision

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 23.13
Page 5 of 6
10. Ensuring operational activities are properly documented
11. Conducting periodic status briefings for superior officers
12. Coordinating operations with St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney's office
or the U.S. Attorney's Office, as necessary
C. Surveillance and Undercover Activities
Upon the identification of a suspect or suspected location involved in illegal activity, a
surveillance or undercover operation may prove to be a viable investigative course of
action. The Bureau of Investigations will follow procedures identified in OPD - 23.1
“Criminal Investigations” and OPD - 23.8 “Surveillance Operations”.
VIII. WARRANT/ARREST OPERATIONS
A. Vice, drug, or organized crime search warrant operations shall be planned and
conducted with due consideration for officer safety, all pertinent legal requirements, and
Departmental procedures.
B. Any search warrant obtained shall be executed by the St. Louis County Police
Department's Tactical Unit, unless otherwise approved by the Chief of Police. The
Commander of the Tactical Unit shall exercise full command and control until the
premises are secure. During the operation phase, the Commander of the Tactical Unit
may assign officers of this Department to:
1. Escort any individuals found on the premises to a central collection point where
they shall be detained for the duration of the operation, or
2. Be the "seizing officer" for any items of evidence or contraband discovered
during the operation, or
3. Direct the requested fire and medical personnel to a staging area in close
proximity, yet at a safe distance from the location, prior to the execution of the
search warrant.
C. Olivette Officers assigned to a search warrant operation shall be mindful of the
following:
1. All Officers participating in the operation are required to wear body armor.
2. Arrests and the transportation of prisoners shall be conducted in accordance
with
OPD - 22.13 “Arrests” and OPD - 34.1 “Prisoner Transportation”.

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 23.13
Page 6 of 6
3. Any "Response to Resistance or Aggression" which may be required shall be in
compliance with OPD - 9.1 "Response to Resistance or Aggression”.
4. A copy of the search warrant must be left with the owner, family member,
occupant, or managing agent of the premises.
5. The search warrant "return" shall be completed and forwarded to the Warrant
Office.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 4/20/2018
Revised: 10/26/2020
Revised: 12/18/2020
Revised: 11/29/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

