OPD – 23.12
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Cancels:
Index as:
Asset Forfeiture
Criminal Activity Forfeiture Act RSMo 513.600
Drug Forfeitures – State
Drug Forfeitures – Federal
ASSET FORFEITURE
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for drug related
violations and the relations to the Criminal Activity Forfeiture Act.
B. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to recognize that the efforts to
identify and apprehend criminals, both those related to drugs and other crimes, must be
complimented and supported by a vigorous effort to seize assets that have been used or
acquired in the commission of crimes.
C. The Commander of Criminal Investigations shall be responsible for the
administration, initiation, and seizures of all property under the statutes. The procedures
will be broken down to drug related violations and those related to the Criminal Activity
Forfeiture Act.
II. DRUG FORFEITURES – STATE (CHAPTER 195 RSMo.):
A. Examples of property subject to seizure/forfeiture are vehicles, aircrafts, boats,
currency, or property of value furnished or intended to be furnished in exchange for drugs
or paraphernalia, or illegal controlled substances.
B. Guidelines used to determine forfeit ability:
1. Item used to transport, carry, or convey controlled substances.

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD – 23.12
Page 2 of 4
2. Used to facilitate the transportation, possession, purchase, sale, barter,
exchange, or giving away of controlled substances.
3. Used to conceal or possess any controlled substance in or upon itself.
C. Requirements:
1. Arrest or attempted arrest of defendant.
2. It is required that a felony charge be prosecuted.
3. Presumption of forfeit ability.
a. Any money found in close proximity to controlled substances is
forfeitable.
b. Vehicle used to conceal and transport controlled substances are
forfeitable.
4. Time restraints – The required documents shall be presented to the Prosecuting
Attorney’s Office within four (4) days of seizure.
5. Required documents – Copy of the police report, Notice of Seizure Form
#OPD – F1069, and DOR record on vehicle. The Assistant Prosecuting Attorney
then prepares and files the petition with the Circuit Court. A copy of all the
required documents will be given to the Commander of Criminal Investigations,
who will maintain a file of all property seized.
6. Seized property, money, jewelry, etc. will be packaged in accordance with
Department policy as evidence until disposed of pursuant to court order.
III. CRIMINAL ACTIVITY FORFEITURE ACT (RSMo 513.600):
A. Applicable Criminal Activity – Applies to all property of every kind used or intended
to be used in the course of, derived from or realized through criminal activity. It extends
beyond drug cases to virtually all criminal activity (weapons, robbery, arson, burglary,
gambling, stealing, prostitution, etc.)
B. Requirements:
1. No arrest requirement at time of seizure.
a. Seizure by Writ of Seizure before arrest.
b. Seizure at time of arrest.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD – 23.12
Page 3 of 4
2. Time restrictions – If seized at time of arrest, the officer must file his report
and Notice of Seizure Form #OPD – F1069 with the Prosecuting Attorney within
four (4) days of the seizure. If an arrest is not made, the officer should apply for a
Writ of Seizure. A copy of all the required documents will be given to the
Commander of Criminal Investigations, who will maintain a file of all property
seized.
3. Seized property – Money, jewelry, etc. will be packaged as evidence in
accordance with Department policy until disposed of pursuant to court order.
C. Seizure – If the property is not seized and if prior notice would cause its loss or
destruction, the state will file a Writ of Seizure and attempt to obtain a court order
directing seizure of the property. Property may be seized without a Writ of Seizure if:
1. Done incident to a lawful arrest, search or inspection;
2. Probable cause exists to believe that the property is subject to forfeiture; and/or
3. Property will be lost or destroyed if not seized.
IV. DRUG FORFEITURES – FEDERAL (21 U.S.C. 853):
A. Property subject to seizure/forfeiture – Vehicles, aircrafts, boats, currency, or
property of value furnished or intended to be furnished in exchange for drugs or
paraphernalia, or illegal controlled substances.
B. Guidelines used to determine forfeit ability:
1. Item used to transport, carry, or convey controlled substances.
2. Used to facilitate the transportation, possession, purchase, sale, barter,
exchange, or giving away of controlled substances.
3. Used to conceal or possess any controlled substance in or upon itself.
C. Requirements:
1. Excess of $5,000 in cash.
2. Excess of $10,000 value for other property (vehicles, etc).
3. Time restrictions – File within thirty (30) days of seizure to appropriate federal
law enforcement agency.
4. Required documents – Copy of police report, a court order signed by the
appropriate Circuit Court Judge authorizing Federal adoption of the seized

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD – 23.12
Page 4 of 4
property, and Form DAG-71. These are then forwarded to the appropriate federal
law enforcement agency. A copy of all the required documents will be given to
the Commander of Criminal Investigations, who will maintain a file of all
property seized.
5. Seized property – Property and money will be packaged as evidence in
accordance with Department policy until disposed of pursuant to court order.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

