OPD - 23.1
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Information Development
Interviews and Interrogations
Collection, Preservation and Use of Physical Evidence
Background Investigations
Surveillance
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION OPERATIONS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for the criminal investigation
function of the Olivette Police Department. The Bureau of Investigation is responsible
for conducting and supervising on-going criminal investigations.
II. INFORMATION DEVELOPMENT:
Investigators will utilize all possible sources available for information development.
Examples of possible sources are:
1. Witnesses and victims shall be interviewed at the earliest possible time
following a crime or incident to develop the most accurate information.
2. Informants.
3. Department records, written or computerized.
4. National Crime Information Center (NCIC) or MULES records.
5. Other law enforcement agencies or federal authorities.
6. Non-law enforcement records such as, Social Security, Social Services,
Department of Revenue, Veterans’ Administration, Banks, Hospitals, and Public
Utilities.

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD - 23.1
Page 2 of 4
III. INTERVIEWS AND INTERROGATIONS:
Interviews shall be conducted to obtain information pertaining to a particular crime.
When possible, the interviews should be conducted by the Bureau of Field Operations. If
the offense is serious in nature, the Commander of the Bureau of Investigations may be
contacted to see if the BOI will conduct the interview.
IV. COLLECTION, PRESERVATION AND USE OF PHYSICAL EVIDENCE:
Detectives of the Bureau of Investigations, in the event of serious major incidents, may
have the responsibility of evidence detection or gathering. The investigators may have
the responsibility of photographing evidence or scenes of crimes and may also package
and remand custody of evidence to the crime laboratory for analysis.
V. BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS:
The Bureau of Investigations will conduct background checks on persons and businesses
in order to ensure that the public safety is protected from persons who are not of good
moral character. As part of the investigations, investigators may find it necessary to
conduct a background investigation of a suspect. The following shall serve as guidelines
for such an investigation:
1. Criminal background investigations shall be conducted as discretely as
possible and under the direct knowledge of the Bureau Commander.
2. Such investigations shall be for the purpose of obtaining total familiarization
of the suspect and their methods of operation.
3. Sources of information for such investigations may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
a. Real estate records;
b. Tax records;
c. Credit checks;
d. Interviews of friends, neighbors and relatives;
e. Current and former employers;
f. Other law enforcement or governmental agencies; and
g. Occupational or other specialized licenses.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD - 23.1
Page 3 of 4
4. All information developed shall be treated as confidential and not disseminated
beyond those directly involved in the case or its management.
5. Background checks will be conducted on those applying for a liquor license
with the City of Olivette.
6. Information may be recorded in an official police report with prosecution
pursued or recorded in memorandum form and forwarded to the Commander of
the Bureau of Investigations for inclusion in the intelligence files.
7. Information secured in the intelligence file will be reviewed annually to
determine whether the information still serves a purpose.
VI. SURVEILLANCE:
Upon the identification of a suspect or suspected location involved in illegal activity, a
surveillance of it may prove to be a viable investigative course of action. The following
shall serve as guidelines during surveillance operations.
1. Surveillance operations shall begin with consideration and analysis of the
crime, suspected offender, associates of the offender, vehicle(s) owned and
operated, methods of operations, and possible dangers such as weapons owned by
the offender.
2. Personnel assigned to the surveillance shall be made familiar with the
suspect(s) and the area, and possible routes of travel that might be taken.
3. The Bureau Commander and/or the Chief of Police will ensure that an
adequate number of personnel is used, and that communication equipment is
available.
4. Based on the nature of the surveillance operations, electronic equipment may
be made available to assist in the investigation. The equipment will be
immediately accessible to investigators. Officers assigned outside the Bureau of
Investigations will contact the Bureau Commander for use. At the conclusion of
the investigation, the equipment will be returned to the Bureau Commander to be
secured.
5. The Bureau Commander will ensure that the operation allows for adequate
manpower for proper security and relief.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD - 23.1
Page 4 of 4
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/16/2009
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

