OPD - 23.2
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Bureau of Investigations Function
Twenty-Four Hour Coverage
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION ADMINISTRATION
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to standardize investigative procedures for both
uniform patrol officers and officers assigned to the Bureau of Investigation; and to
establish policies, procedures and guidelines that will ensure the effective and efficient
performance of investigation functions by the Olivette Police Department. The
Commander of the Bureau of Investigations is a Lieutenant or Sergeant who reports
directly to the Deputy Chief of Police.
B. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to investigate all reported criminal
offenses by collecting information basic to the report of the offense; collecting and
preserving evidence; apprehending suspected offenders; recovering property; and
preparing cases for prosecution. Although both patrol officers and detectives share the
criminal investigation function, the ultimate objective of any criminal investigation is
case clearance.
II. FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU OF INVESTIGATIONS:
A. Criminal investigations,
B. Juvenile investigations,
C. Intelligence, organized crime and vice operations, and
D. Pre-employment background investigations for all employees.

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 23.2
Page 2 of 3
III. RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Conducting follow-up investigations on active crimes reported to the Department.
B. Juvenile follow-up investigations, referring juvenile apprehensions to Family Court,
when necessary.
C. Collect, process, and record criminal intelligence information related to organized
crime, vice, narcotics activity, and other criminal activities; conduct undercover
investigations and support undercover operatives.
D. Develop, maintain contact with, and appropriately record information from
informants.
E. Maintain and care for all specialized and technical criminal investigative equipment.
F. Maintain liaison with the St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office, and other
law enforcement agencies for the purpose of coordinating activities and exchanging
information.
G. Assist uniformed officers with preliminary investigations when appropriate.
I. The Bureau of Investigations will handle and/or assist with, but is not limited to, the
following offenses:
1. Homicides/Suspicious Deaths;
2. Suicides;
3. Hostages/Barricaded Subjects;
4. Response to Resistance or Aggression w/Substantial Bodily Harm/Deadly
Response to Resistance or Aggression; and
5. Special investigations.
IV. TWENTY-FOUR HOUR COVERAGE:
A. The Bureau of Investigations does not provide a criminal investigation function to the
Department on a continuous 24-hour basis. Therefore, an on-call list of investigators will
be maintained. If an investigator is needed, the Chief of Police and the Commander of
the Bureau of Investigations will be notified through the chain of command.

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 23.2
Page 3 of 3
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 11/24/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

