OPD - 23.3
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Community Engagement Officer
Detective Position
Information Sharing
Position Parity
Special Assignments
ASSIGNMENT OF PERSONNEL
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish position parity between Bureaus of this
Department as well as to establish specialized assignments within the Police Department.
II. POSITION PARITY
To facilitate lateral personnel movement without affecting an individual’s income,
officers assigned special assignments are equal in salary to their patrol counterparts, and
no qualifying test will be used in making assignments. Transferring to a specialized area
will be considered an assignment and not a promotion. Assignments to a specialized area
will be based on the needs of the Department and the ability and qualifications of the
person selected for the assignment.
III. DEFINTIONS
A. TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT – An assignment of limited duration that is intended
to facilitate skill enhancement and career development opportunities for police officers.
B. PERMANENT ASSIGNMENT – An assignment of permanent duration that is
intended to maximize the skill set of the individual officer to ensure the long-term
sustainability and success of the specialized unit and to provide the best possible resource
to meet the Department’s needs.
C. RETENTION PERIOD – Duration of specific specialized assignment.

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 23.3
Page 2 of 3
III. SPECIALIZED ASSIGNMENTS:
A. Specialized assignments are those assignments or positions that are often
characterized by increased levels of responsibility or specialized training and skills, but
within the same rank.
B. The Department considers the following assignments to be specialized:
1. Bureau of Investigations – Detective
2. Bureau of Investigations Commander – Detective Sergeant/Lieutenant
3. Bureau of Support Services – Community Engagement Officer
4. Bureau of Support Services Commander – Lieutenant
C. Specialized assignments are intended to address specific needs of the Department.
The Chief of Police will be responsible for the assignment functions and will complete an
assessment of the need for these assignments. This assessment will be made in
conjunction with the preparation of the annual budget.
D. Openings for special assignments will be announced to all personnel and will include
the requirements, knowledge, abilities, and skills necessary for the assignment. Officers
will submit a letter of interest to the Chief of Police who will then make the selection for
special assignment.
IV. DURATION OF ASSIGNMENTS
A. Personnel selected for special assignments will be limited to the following retention
periods:
(1) Detective — 5-year assignment
(1) Bureau of Investigations Commander — Permanent assignment
(1) Community Engagement Officer — 3-year assignment
(1) Bureau of Support Services Commander — Permanent assignment
B. Personnel transferred to a special assignment who fail to perform to the established
expectations of the assignment job description may be transferred back to their parity
position prior to the completion of their retention period.
D. Alterations, limitations, extensions, or deviations of the retention periods may occur in
incidents of promotion, employment separation, disciplinary actions or other incidents
that influence the manpower needs of the Department.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 23.3
Page 3 of 3
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 01/27/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Revised: 9/30/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

