OPD - 23.4
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Report Management
Case Assignments
Case Designation
REPORT MANAGEMENT
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish a system of report management for the
criminal investigation function of the Bureau of Investigations.
II. REPORT MANAGEMENT:
A. The Bureau of Investigations will maintain a paper/electronic copy of the original
report, relevant supplemental reports, computer files, and notes throughout the
investigation.
B. The Bureau of Investigations maintains a listing of open cases and dispositions.
Cases will be assigned a disposition as follows:
1. Active – the case is currently under investigation.
2. Inactive – the case is suspended due to the exhaustion of leads.
3. Cleared by Arrest – a suspect has been arrested and charged with a crime.
4. Closed – the investigation is complete due to external factors (i.e. expiration of
statute of limitations, etc.)
5. Exceptionally Cleared – the case is cleared due to one of the following:
a. The suspect dies in custody;
b. Extradition is declined, or the suspect is confined in another location;
c. The victim refuses to cooperate; or

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 23.4
Page 2 of 3
d. The suspect is a juvenile who is taken into custody and released to
parent or guardian (i.e. curfew violation, etc.)
6. Unfounded – There was no evidence of a crime being committed either by
admission or investigation.
C. Report files are secured in the offices of the Bureau of Investigations. Access to
active files is limited to police personnel only with the approval of the Bureau of
Investigations Commander, or the Chief of Police.
D. The Records Clerk will maintain a paper copy of the original report and all
supplemental reports.
E. The Commander of the Bureau of Investigations is responsible for ensuring cases are
investigated and reported properly.
III. CASE ASSIGNMENTS:
A. The Commander of the Bureau of Investigations will determine the distribution of
case assignments to the detectives, based on the detectives’ experience, expertise and
workload.
B. All cases not cleared by the Bureau of Field Operations Officers will be assigned to
the Bureau of Investigations.
C. The assigned Detectives shall review each assigned case and make note of leads for
follow-up. Victims and witnesses shall be contacted on all cases.
D. The Detectives should ascertain the victim’s willingness to cooperate on the
prosecution of the crime.
E. Investigating Detectives will notify the victims any time there is a change of status in
their case. Official notification is by means of telephone contact, personal contact, or by
written correspondence.
1. Evidence presented to the Prosecutor’s Office for disposition.
2. Re-opening the case based on new evidence or leads.
F. It is the responsibility of the Detectives to ensure that follow-up investigations are
completed in a timely manner.
G. A case will generally be inactivated after all leads are exhausted. If new information
becomes available at a later time, the case may be re-opened for further follow-up. The
criterion for suspending a case is as follows:

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 23.4
Page 3 of 3
1. Seriousness of the case,
2. Solvability factors including if there is a witness, an identification of suspect or
suspect vehicle, a significant M.O., or significant evidence,
3. Unavailability of investigative resources, and/or
4. Unable to locate a victim or lack of cooperation from a victim.
H. Any cases that the prosecutor declines to prosecute or causes to be dismissed, and
such action stems from the contention that the case was mishandled or poorly prepared by
the officers assigned, will be reviewed by the officers’ supervisors.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 3/20/2018
Revised: 8/21/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

