OPD – 23.5
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Confidential Informants
_______________________________________________________________________
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMANTS
I. POLICY:
The Department encourages development and use of informants. The proper legal use of
an informant can greatly assist the efforts of the officer in obtaining vital information that
may be used in any investigation.
II. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Order is to set forth procedures to help members of the Department
develop and effectively use informants and the information obtained.
III. PROCEDURE:
A. Definitions:
1. By definition, an informant is a person who provides information. A citizen
giving an officer information about neighborhood activities is an informant. An
arrested person who provides information about other participants in a crime is an
informant. An informant can be one who is paid money from an officer to provide
information about who committed a particular crime.
An officer shall develop a variety of information, sources or informants. In many
cases, information will flow as a result of friendly, courteous conversations and
questioning, by building rapport, by providing efficient law enforcement response
and by listening and talking.
2. For purposes of this Order, a confidential informant (CI) is defined as someone
who provides useful information or intelligence concerning criminal activity
(including, but not limited to vice and organized crime) and who expects some
kind of return. Return is defined as payment in money, or assistance from the
County Attorney or the Courts, or the satisfaction of a personal need to contribute
to the improvement of the neighborhood.

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD – 23.5
Page 2 of 6
3. Entrapment: Occurs when a commissioned employee or a person acting in
cooperation with the commissioned employee (informant), for the purposes of
obtaining evidence of the commission of an offense, solicits, encourages or
otherwise induces another person to engage in criminal conduct when he/she was
not ready and willing to engage in such conduct.
B. Identity of Informants:
Each officer who wishes to develop and use an informant, as defined above, will prepare
a confidential file envelope on the informant as follows:
1. On the front of an envelope, place the following information:
a. Officer’s name and DSN;
b. Informant’s number – This will consist of the officer’s DSN followed
by an alphabetic letter, A for first informant, B for the next, C for the
third, etc. If the informant is a juvenile, write the word “Juvenile” after
the letter.
2. Prepare or collect the following and place inside the envelope:
a. Biographical and background information: name, aliases, address,
telephone numbers, known acquaintances, habits, etc.
b. Criminal history record, when applicable.
c. Information the informant has or can be expected to provide.
d. Record of any payments made to the informant by the Department.
e. Degree of involvement of informants in any operation.
3. Seal the envelope and give it personally to the Chief of Police. The envelope
will then be stored in a locked file cabinet in the Bureau of Investigations (BOI)
Commander’s Office. The BOI Commander will develop and maintain a master
informant file and indexing system. This will be the only informant file.
4. Once an informant file has been prepared, all future references to the informant
in any reports will be by informant number only. Informant names will not be
used.
5. To further protect the identity of confidential informants, officers are prohibited
from discussing any information pertaining to any confidential informants in any
type of public setting with regards to the confidential informant’s name, personal
information, or any other pertinent information regarding the informant.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD – 23.5
Page 3 of 6
6. Once the informant file has been prepared, the officer is responsible for
keeping the file up-to-date. The officer simply requests the numbered file from
the BOI Commander and places the additional information within and returns it.
This should be done in the presence of the BOI Commander or his/her designee.
7. Two or more officers may develop the same person as an informant. Each
officer will develop a separate informant file and assign an informant number.
8. Informant files can be retained indefinitely, but officers are encouraged to keep
only active informants on file. Consideration should be given to purging of non-
active informant files every three (3) years.
9. The only personnel who will have access to the confidential informant files will
be the BOI Commander and the Chief of Police. All other access shall be granted
only by the Chief of Police.
10. Special care should be utilized in dealing with confidential informants. Many
times, these individuals have previous criminal history which permits them the
ability to serve as a confidential informant. Detectives and police officers should
use caution when dealing with these individuals, both for reliability, as well as
personal safety. Anytime a CI is debriefed or met in person, for the safety of the
officer, the CI will be searched prior to debriefing or being brought into a secure
area of the Police Department. Officers will not meet with confidential informants
alone; a secondary officer(s) will be present for security and liability concerns.
Confidential informants should always be considered a potential threat and never
be trusted with any sensitive information. Confidential informants should be
handled with the utmost caution at all times.
C. Use of Police Informants:
1. Police officers will not make any deals with people concerning charging,
pleading or sentencing. Officers may, however, consult with the City Prosecuting
Attorney or St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office regarding these
matters.
2. Informant information may become the basis for a variety of legal and law
enforcement processes. The officer should carefully consider the possibilities of
being required to identify an informant in the courtroom, possibly placing the
informant in jeopardy.
3. Informants as participants in offenses must be willing to testify in court.
4. Officers shall deal with informants very carefully and with circumspection,
particularly those of the opposite sex. Officers are prohibited from establishing a
personal relationship with an informant that goes beyond their official duties.

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD – 23.5
Page 4 of 6
5. Each time an informant is utilized, an entry into a log will be completed by the
BOI Commander with the following information and included in a quarterly
report to the Chief of Police:
a. Police report number or event number (if applicable);
b. Date the informant was used;
c. Type of service the informant provided (C.I. buy, undercover
introduction, general intelligence information, etc.)
6. Payments to informants will be authorized by the Chief of Police, after a
memorandum has been prepared requesting such funding and forwarded through
the chain of command. Informant payments will be from the City’s petty cash
fund maintained by the Finance Department.
a. Fees paid to informants are based on the quality and quantity of
information. Fees paid to informants shall be a cash-on-delivery basis
after the information is received. The informant will sign a receipt with
their name or code number, and the receipt will be placed in the
informants file.
b. Any and all payments to confidential informants will be included in the
quarterly reports from the BOI Commander.
7. Every six (6) months after the creation of the informant file, the BOI
Commander shall be required to review the informant file and update it with an
additional criminal history record, current address(es), phone number(s), new
vehicle(s), current associate(s), etc. Any obsolete or outdated information should
be removed from the files and destroyed. Informant files which are not updated
every six (6) months shall be considered inactive.
8. The use of juvenile informants is NOT authorized without PRIOR approval of
the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Juvenile informants should only be used
for criminal intelligence that seriously affects individual or public safety or in
those instances when it is necessary to clear a crime that has already occurred.
a. If a juvenile informant is used without the direct approval of the Chief
of Police, the BOI Commander shall notify the Chief of Police within 24
hours.
b. In the rare case of utilizing a juvenile as a confidential informant,
providing safeguards for the juvenile confidential informant is of utmost
importance. Prior to the use of a juvenile as a confidential informant,
his/her parent must be completely aware and give legal permission for
their child to participate with this law enforcement agency.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD – 23.5
Page 5 of 6
c. Juvenile confidential informants will never be left alone and will always
be under surveillance during any investigation or operation.
9. Specific guidelines exist through case law regarding the legal use of
informants. The following points are offered to help officers judge the usefulness
of their informants.
a. If possible, corroborate informant tips through independent
investigation.
b. If informant tips form probable cause to arrest or search, the officer
involved must be prepared to justify to the Court why the informant is
credible and why his/her information is reliable.
10. The supervisor and all officers involved with utilizing a confidential informant
will do everything possible to ensure the safety of the informant. This includes
ensuring the informant’s physical safety if utilized during an investigation, and
the safety of the informant’s identity prior, during or after their participation with
any Olivette Police Department undercover investigation.
a. The commissioned employee utilizing the informant shall discuss each
of the following provisions with the informant PRIOR to utilizing him/her
in any operation:
i. Informants are not law enforcement officers. They have no arrest
powers, are not permitted to conduct searches and/or seizures and
may not carry a weapon.
ii. Informants will be arrested if found to be participating in any
illegal activity.
iii. Informants are not to take any action, and the Olivette Police
Department will not condone any action that may be considered
entrapment.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD – 23.5
Page 6 of 6
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 8/17/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

