OPD - 23.6
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Crime Status Control System
Case File Management
Case Assignments
CASE MANAGEMENT
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish a system of case file management for
the criminal investigation function of the Bureau of Investigations.
II. CASE STATUS CONTROL SYSTEM:
A. The Bureau of Investigations Commander maintains a spreadsheet used for case
tracking purposes. As police incident reports are reviewed daily, the bureau supervisor
will assign cases out to the respective investigators. Whenever form #OPD-F1168, “Case
Screening & Assignment”, is initiated, the following information is entered into the
computer referencing the particular case being assigned:
1. Report number;
2. Name of Victim;
3. Detective to whom the case is assigned;
4. Date the case was assigned; and
5. Type of incident.
B. Once a month, assigned cases are reviewed by the Bureau of Investigations
Commander. At that time, the status of the case is updated on the spreadsheet.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 23.6
Page 2 of 2
III. CASE FILE MANAGEMENT:
A. Case assignments are issued to detectives who maintain a copy of the original report,
relevant supplemental reports, computer files, and notes throughout the investigation.
B. The Bureau of Investigations Commander maintains a listing of case assignments and
dispositions.
C. Case files are secured in the Bureau of Investigation offices.
D. Upon completion or termination of an investigation, all supplemental reports, and
related attachments (i.e. Miranda Rights Waiver, Written Statements, Confessions, Lab
Reports, Photos, etc.) are submitted to the Bureau of Investigations Commander for
review and approval, then forwarded to the record room for inclusion in the original
report file. None of these documents are maintained in Bureau of Investigations files.
All original notes, working copies of the original report, and computer files not
forwarded with the case reports are destroyed.
E. The Bureau of Investigations Commander is responsible for ensuring case
assignments are documented, investigated, and reported properly.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 8/21/2018
Revised: 8/23/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 1/29/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

