OPD – 23.7
Page 1 of 12
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Interviews and Interrogations
Miranda Warning
Rights Waiver
Line-ups
INTERVIEWS AND INTERROGATIONS
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures used during criminal
investigations.
II. INTERVIEWS AND INTERROGATIONS:
A. The objective of every criminal investigation is to present to the court the evidence of
the crime and the suspected offender. There are two general methods for gathering such
information – interview or interrogation.
1. Interviewing is a method used to obtain information from those willing to
provide it. An interview is described as a conversation with a purpose. It may
include bits and pieces of information from different persons, which when
accumulated, can prove valuable to the case. When a police officer arrives at the
scene of a crime and before any suspect is identified, he can legally ask many
general questions as to what occurred. (Under his police powers a police officer
has the authority to stop suspicious persons and conduct a “threshold inquiry” by
asking a suspect his name, address, and what he is doing.)
2. Interrogation is the process of obtaining information from suspected persons
or from reluctant witnesses unwilling to cooperate voluntarily. The United States
Supreme Court in a number of landmark decisions, primarily Miranda vs.
Arizona, 384 US 436 (1996), has imposed limitations on police powers to
question suspects. Under these guidelines, the police cannot question any person
who has been taken into custody or deprived of his freedom in any significant
way until they have first informed him of his right to remain silent; that anything
he may say can be used against him; that he is entitled to have his attorney present

-- 1 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 2 of 12
when being interrogated, and that an attorney will be provided if the suspect
cannot afford one. If the suspect “knowingly” waives his rights to this
Constitutional protection, the interrogation may begin. The police may have the
burden of proving later that the suspect wasn’t coerced into submitting to
questioning. The suspect can stop the interrogation at any time by invoking his
privilege of silence or requesting a lawyer.
B. It is important, therefore, for every police officer to clearly understand the effect of
the Miranda decision in carrying out his duties. Officers should also be aware that
interrogation includes not only questioning but has been defined as words or actions by
the police which the officers should have known were likely to elicit an incriminating
response. However, if suspects freely choose to divulge information without questioning
there is no requirement that an officer prevent a suspect from continuing to talk, and
whatever statements are made voluntarily, such statements shall be noted. But if an
officer wishes to gain further information through questioning, the Miranda Warning
shall be given before questioning the suspect. The following guidelines will make an
interrogation and the information gained, admissible when presented to the court.
III. INTERVIEWING WITNESSES:
A. The effective interviewing of persons having knowledge that is helpful in the solution
of a case is a vital part of the investigative process. The interviewing of witnesses
enables the investigator to collect pertinent facts, substantiate information already
available from other sources or to obtain additional information.
IV. INITIAL WITNESS CONTACT:
A. Witnesses should be interviewed as soon as possible.
B. Consideration must be given to the physical and emotional needs of the witnesses.
C. The immediate objective of the interviewing officer should be to establish a
cooperative relationship.
D. An officer should immediately identify himself or show identification if not in
uniform.
V. PROCEDURE OF ADULTS:
A. When an adult is taken into custody or is otherwise deprived of his/her freedom, a
police officer shall give the person in custody the Miranda Warning as follows:
1. That s/he has the right to remain silent.
2. That anything s/he says can be used against him/her in court.

-- 2 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 3 of 12
3. That s/he has the right to consult with an attorney before s/he is questioned and
to have the attorney present during questioning.
4. That if s/he cannot afford an attorney one will be appointed for him/her and that
s/he can consult with the appointed attorney before questioning.
5. That s/he understands each of these rights as explained to him/her.
6. That having been informed of these rights, does s/he wish to waive them and
speak to the officer?
B. The Miranda Warning may be read from a rights form. The suspect should be
requested to sign the form indicating that he understands his Constitutional rights. This
procedure is beneficial because:
1. The Miranda rights form can later be introduced as evidence.
2. The suspect can also be allowed to read the Miranda rights form.
VI. JUVENILE PROCEDURES:
A. See Olivette Police Department General Order #OPD - 25.1 JUVENILE
PROCEDURES.
VII. GUIDELINES FOR GIVING THE MIRANDA WARNING:
A. The complete Miranda Warning shall be given to all suspects in custody prior to the
interview or interrogation involving guilt seeking questions.
B. The Warning shall be given in a clear, unhurried manner.
C. After the Warning is given, the officer will allow the suspect to read the Rights Waiver
form. Officers will ask if he/she understands their Rights and will request the suspect to
sign the waiver form.
D. Subjects who don’t speak English shall be given the Warning in a language they
understand. Officers needing an interpreter may contact Linquistica International by
following the below steps:
1. Call the toll free number at : (866) 908-5744. If you need a Spanish interpreter
you will be connected immediately by pressing “2” when prompted. If you need
any other language press “3” or stay on the line.
2. You will be asked to provide the following information:
• Account number: 11270
• PIN: 11270

-- 3 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 4 of 12
• Event or Report Number
• Your name and DSN
3. Hold as the operator connects you to your interpreter.
4. A conferencing option is available upon request.
5. Begin the conversation.
6. Officers should obtain the interpreter’s personal ID # for their written report.
VIII. VOLUNTARY STATEMENTS:
A. Officers may take note of any voluntary statements offered by a suspect. When a
suspect or prisoner voluntarily makes a statement, officers do not have to prevent him
from continuing to talk, and the Miranda Warning is not a prerequisite for admissibility.
1. Voluntary statements are those not made on response to questioning by an
officer. Voluntary statements are those statements made by a suspect of his own
free will.
2. Voluntary statements may be taken after the subject is in custody or before,
during, or after actual interrogation, so long as the statements are clearly
voluntary.
IX. WAIVER OF RIGHTS:
A. Questioning may begin after the Miranda Warning is given and the subject has waived
his/her rights. Waivers must be shown to be made knowingly and voluntarily.
1. Waivers cannot be inferred from silence.
2. Reasonable verbal acknowledgement of understanding and willingness to speak
is acceptable.
3. Although not legally required, the subject should be asked to sign the Waiver of
Rights form. It will only be useful if the subject is literate. Therefore, it is always
best to have a verbal waiver as well.
4. A suspect may waive his/her rights but refuse to sign the Rights form. This
does not render the statement invalid. If the suspect agrees to talk but will not
sign the form, a notation will be made on the form by the officer that the suspect
agreed verbally to make a statement and waive his/her rights but refused to sign it.
The time and date of the waiver should also be noted on the form.

-- 4 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 5 of 12
B. A suspect who requests the aid or presence of an attorney shall not be questioned until
the attorney is present regardless of when the request is made. Once a suspect has
requested the presence of an attorney, he/she shall not be further interrogated until he/she
has been afforded the opportunity to consult with counsel confidentially. Also, when
there is a significant time lapse between the waiver of rights and the interrogation, the
Miranda Warning must be repeated.
C. If a suspect advises that he/she wishes to remain totally silent, the questioning must
cease.
D. A subject must be competent to waive his/her rights. Competency is more likely to be
raised under the following conditions:
1. Youthful age,
2. Mental condition,
3. Drug or alcohol intake, or
4. Medical impairment.
5. Persons with these and related problems are not automatically prevented from
giving a waiver. However, because such a waiver may be subject to close
scrutiny, officers should take care to ensure that the waiver is clearly understood
by the subject.
E. No person, under any circumstance, will be coerced or forced to submit an involuntary
statement. All persons will be treated respectfully.
X. INTERVIEW ROOMS:
A. The Department has three interview rooms: two on the second floor and one in the
holding facility. One of the rooms on the second floor is a “soft” interview room. The
holding facility Interview Room should only be used to interview adult suspects who are
in custody. The upstairs Interview Rooms can be used for suspects, witnesses, and
victims. The Soft Interview Room should be considered for witnesses/victims of sensitive
or traumatic cases as well as juveniles. Officers are accountable for the supervision and
welfare of suspects, witnesses, and victims while utilizing the rooms.
B. The rooms specifically designated in the Police Department as interview rooms are
purposely void of decorations and equipment so as not to distract the attention of a
suspect, victim or witness. Items that are kept in the interview rooms shall include a desk
or table top and not less than two chairs. As a general rule, it is advisable not to bring
foreign items into the room for both safety and tactical reasons. While the following list
is not exhaustive, items that may typically be brought into an interview room by Police
personnel include note pads, pens or pencils, recorders, lap top computers, CVSA

-- 5 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 6 of 12
machines, cell phones, digital cameras, photographs or other items needed to show to the
suspect, witness or victim as part of the investigation. Pens and pencils should not be left
in an interview room after an interview or interrogation is completed. All items shall be
removed after completion of the interview.
1. Victims, witnesses, or suspects left alone in an interview room will be visually
monitored at least every 15 minutes. This may be accomplished by electronic
surveillance. They will have access to water, restrooms, and other needs, by
requesting service from the attending officer.
2. Male and female prisoners, as well as adults and juveniles, must be separated
by sight and sound if left in an interview room without personnel present.
3. Suspects will be searched prior to entering an interview room.
4. Suspects or arrestees will not be restrained to any objects in the interview
rooms. In the event of an emergency, or in the event that an interviewee becomes
violent, the interviewee should be removed to a holding cell in the holdover area.
5. The training for all agency staff with any responsibility for suspects in
temporary custody (i.e. questioning) is the same as for prisoners who are held in
the regular or temporary holding facility.
6. The interview rooms will be checked prior to placing the suspect inside. After
the suspect is removed, the room will be checked again.
7. In an effort to prevent escapes, interview rooms will be locked at all times
while the suspect is alone in the room.
8. In the event of an emergency, officers will use their portable radio or telephone
to request assistance. Officers may also activate one of the “panic strips” in the
interview rooms to signal an emergency. The dispatchers will notify personnel
over the radio of the situation and will assign a patrol unit and supervisor to
respond to the appropriate interview room.
9. Only those personnel conducting the investigation should be in the interview
room up to a maximum of two (2) officers/detectives.
10. While interviewing detainees in the interview rooms, officers and detectives
will secure their weapons (firearms and knives) in a secure storage area. Tasers
and pepper spray are permitted in the interview rooms by personnel trained in the
use of the same.
11. In the event of a fire or other emergency requiring evacuation, the officer
conducting the interview should insure the evacuation of the detainee. Detainees
should be evacuated to a secure area nearest the exit used.

-- 6 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 7 of 12
XI. RECORDED INTERROGATION:
A. Per 590.701 RSMo., custodial interrogations of persons suspected of committing or
attempting to commit the following crimes will be recorded, when feasible, through the
use of the officer’s Department issued body worn camera and/or the digital video
recording system within the Police Department:
1. Murder in the first degree.
2. Murder in the second degree.
3. Assault in the first degree.
4. Assault of a Law Enforcement Officer in the first degree.
5. Domestic Assault in the first degree.
6. Elder abuse in the first degree.
7. Robbery in the first degree.
8. Arson in the first degree.
9. Rape in the first degree
10. Forcible rape.
11. Sodomy in the first degree
12. Forcible sodomy.
13. Kidnapping.
14. Kidnapping in the first degree
15. Statutory rape in the first degree.
16. Statutory Sodomy in the first degree
17. Child abuse.
18. Child kidnapping.

-- 7 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 8 of 12
B. Although not required by Missouri state statute, officers will record all custodial
interrogations utilizing Department-owned audio, video and/or digital recording
equipment except:
1. When the suspect requests the interrogation not be recorded.
2. During exigent public safety circumstances that prevent recording.
3. When a suspect makes spontaneous utterances.
4. When recording equipment is not available.
C. It is the policy of this Department to provide officers with guidelines to follow when
conducting audio/video recorded interrogations.
1. The interrogator should introduce him/herself and all other persons present in
the interrogation room.
2. The subject should be advised of his Rights per Departmental Form #OPD –
F1034. The suspect should be asked to fill out the form, although they are not
required to for the interview to be valid.
3. Obtain affirmative, verbal waivers. A nod of the head will not suffice.
4. State the time, date and place where the statement is being made.
5. Have the subject give his/her full name, age, date of birth, state that he/ she was
born in, occupation, marital status, and home address.
6. The interrogation should follow the basic narrative-based interview model if
possible:
a. The officer should ask the suspect to tell them what happened, explain
the situation, tell the officer what they know, etc.
b. The officer can utilize follow-up questions/statements to clarify the
suspect’s statement, obtain more detailed answers, or discredit what the
suspect stated.
c. Physical evidence may be shown if it is believed it will enhance the
outcome of the interview.
D. Recordings of interviews on the officer’s Department issued body worn camera should
be downloaded in the CARE scanned documents folder under the appropriate report
number. Digital video files can be bookmarked in the GENETEC surveillance system and
transferred to CARE scanned documents, if needed.

-- 8 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 9 of 12
XII. LINE-UP:
A. The Department’s policy shall guarantee each suspect involved in a line-up, protection
from self-incrimination, the right to legal counsel, where applicable, and due process of
law. The right to legal counsel in a line-up situation exists where a warrant has been
issued. The right does not exist where the suspect has been arrested without a warrant
and is being held up to 24 hours pursuant to Section 544.170 RSMo.
B. Where the right to legal counsel exists, the suspect must be advised of such right. If
the line-up is then conducted without counsel present, there must be a knowing and
intelligent oral or written waiver of the right to presence of counsel, preferably before a
disinterested party.
C. If legal counsel is desired, the suspect shall be responsible for notifying said counsel
of the time and place for the line-up. Counsel’s participation in the line-up shall be
limited to that of an observer. If counsel fails to report at the scheduled time or deems his
presence unnecessary, the line-up shall proceed as planned.
D. A suspect has no legal right to refuse participation in a line-up; however, he may be
permitted to select his position in the line-up. Refer to “Family Court of St. Louis
County Police Procedures Manual”, Chapter 5, Section D, for the policy and procedures
for conducting line-ups for juveniles.
XIII. RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMISSIONED EMPLOYEES CONDUCTING THE
LINE-UP:
A. Every effort will be made to request a line-up at reasonable hours and at the
convenience of victims and witnesses unless special circumstances warrant otherwise.
B. If needed, transportation will be provided for witnesses or victims.
C. If necessary, make arrangements for the line-up to be photographed.
XIV. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PHOTOGRAPHER:
A. Before the witnesses have viewed the line-up, photograph the participants in the same
position as they will appear.
B. Prepare a supplemental report.
C. Submit as evidence the photographs of the line-up.
XV. PRIOR TO CONDUCTING THE LINE-UP:
A. Inform the suspect that he may choose his initial position in the line-up.

-- 9 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 10 of 12
B. Instruct the non-suspects in the line-up to conduct themselves so as not to single out
the suspect.
C. If the suspect will be required to answer questions, utter specific words, make
particular movements, or assume a specific pose, direct all participants to respond in the
same manner.
XVI. WHEN CONDUCTING THE LINE-UP:
A. Line-ups may be conducted at the St. Louis County Justice Center or any appropriate
facility and administered by the investigating commissioned employee.
B. A minimum of four (4) participants, including the suspect, should be placed in the
line-up. If the required number of participants is unable to be assembled, the
commissioned employee conducting the line-up may locate suitable participants.
C. All participants in the line-up shall be of similar physical appearance (i.e. race, sex,
age, height, weight, etc.) and wear similar clothing. Guidelines for participants should
fall in a “range”. For example, three inches either way on height and 20-25 pounds either
way on weight. Care should be exercised in handling the witness(es) who will view the
line-up.
D. Witnesses shall not view the suspect prior to the actual line-up.
E. Only one (1) witness at a time shall view the line-up.
F. Witnesses shall not speak to the suspect during the line-up.
G. Witnesses shall not be permitted to collaborate.
H. Upon completion of the line-up, each witness shall be privately interviewed.
I. A “mug shot” line-up shall follow the same procedures as noted herein.
J. Do not say or do anything to distinguish the suspect from the other line-up participants.
K. Ask only those questions and require only those statements, movements or poses that
were discussed with the line-up participants.
XVII. COMPLETION OF THE LINE-UP:
Upon completion of the line-up, prepare a supplemental report relative to the line-up.
The report shall include:
1. Date, time and location of the line-up,

-- 10 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 11 of 12
2. Suspect’s identity,
3. A written or oral waiver of rights by the suspect, if applicable,
4. Name, address, and telephone number of suspect’s attorney, if applicable,
5. Participants’ identity to include name, age, date of birth, height and weight,
6. Position in the line-up of each participant,
7. Statement that suspect selected his own position in the line-up, if applicable,
8. Name(s) of the witnesses,
9. Results of the line-up, and
10. All other details deemed necessary.
XVIII. CREATING AND CONDUCTING PHOTO LINEUPS:
A. Simultaneous Photo Lineup – The simultaneous photo lineup consists of showing a
group of similar photos to a witness all at the same time. Witnesses should be advised
that the perpetrator may or may not be present in the photo lineup. All simultaneous
photo lineups shall be done using the following guidelines:
1. A minimum grouping of six (6) photo must be used to create the photo lineup,
and must include five (5) filler photos with one (1) suspect.
2. The photo of the suspect must be contemporary, shall resemble as much as
possible their appearance at the time of the offense, and shall reasonably resemble
the witness’s description of the perpetrator.
3. All filler photos should resemble the suspect photo as much as possible,
including size, background, race and skin tone, facial features, weight, hair color
and length, scars, tattoo, eyeglasses, etc.
4. If there is more than one suspect, each suspect photo will be placed in the
grouping of six separately from any other suspect, and the grouping will be
changed so that the suspect’s photos are not always in the same position in the
grouping.
5.The officer that administers the photo lineup should NOT be involved with the
investigation if possible and should not know which picture is the suspect. This
will reduce the possibility of suggestibility when administering the photo lineup.

-- 11 of 12 --

OPD – 23.7
Page 12 of 12
6. If there is more than one witness, each witness will be shown the lineup
separately; the suspect photo shall be placed in a different position in the grouping
for each witness, and the witnesses will not be permitted to communicate with
each other until after the lineup procedure has been completed.
7. If the witness has previously viewed a photo lineup in connection with the
identification of another person suspected of involvement in the offense, the
fillers in the lineup shall be different from the fillers used in any prior lineups.
8. If an identification is made, the witness will be told to circle the identified
photo and write their initials and the date next to it. The officer shall assess
witness confidence immediately following the identification, and clearly
document witness confidence by quoting the witnesses remarks in the police
report. If no identification is made, this fact must also be clearly documented in
the police report.
9. Regardless as to whether the victim/witness identifies the correct photo, the
photo lineup will be seized and packaged as evidence. The officer will ensure that
all pertinent information is completed on the photo lineup. A photocopy of the
photo lineup will be attached to the officer’s report.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 10/20/2009
Revised: 9/16/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 7/31/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 6/15/2021
Revised: 1/29/2024
Revised: 1/14/2026
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 12 of 12 --

