OPD - 25.1
Page 1 of 13
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Juvenile Offenders
Interviews and Interrogations
St. Louis County Family Court Intake
Child Abuse and Neglect
Protective Custody
Certification of Juveniles
Handling of Certain Offenses
Photographs
Fingerprinting
JUVENILE PROCEDURES
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for incidents that
involve juveniles.
B. Chapter 211 of the Missouri Revised Statutes, the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention (JJDP) Act established by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention (OJJDP), and rules established by the St. Louis County Family Court
establishes procedures that are to be followed when dealing with juveniles. Juveniles are
segregated from adult offenders when arrested. Procedures also differ during juvenile
interview and booking procedures. All records of juvenile arrests or other involvements
are confidential and must not be released to the public without authorization. Officers
dealing with juvenile offenders shall use the least coercive of all reasonable alternatives
consistent with preserving public safety, order and individual liberty. For additional
information regarding Missouri laws, and Supreme Court Rules, refer to guidelines for
police handling of juvenile matters contained in the Family Court of St. Louis County
policies manual.

-- 1 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 2 of 13
II. POLICY
A. The Olivette Police Department is committed to developing, implementing, and
perpetuating programs designed to prevent and control juvenile delinquency. It is the
responsibility of every component of the Department to participate in and support our
juvenile operations function. The Department encourages suggestions and comments
from other elements of the juvenile justice system and outside agencies concerning
juvenile programs or operations.
B. It shall be the duty of all Olivette Police Officers to ensure the constitutional rights of
any juvenile in which they come in contact with regarding a criminal matter are
protected.
III. DEFINITIONS:
A. Juvenile – A person under the age of eighteen (18).
B. Abuse or Neglect Victim – A person under the age of eighteen (18) at the time of the
offense.
C. Under Supervision – A person over the age of sixteen (16) may still be under the
supervision of the juvenile court until the age of twenty-one (21). If a person under the
supervision of the court reaches his seventeenth birthday, then commits another offense,
he is then handled as an adult in regard to the new offense.
D. Deputy Juvenile Officer (DJO) – An employee of the Chief Juvenile Officer of the St.
Louis County Family Court.
E. Police Juvenile Detective – A commissioned police officer designated by the Chief of
Police as a Juvenile Officer.
F. Responsible Adult – A person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who, in the
judgment of the police officer, would be responsible for the custody of a juvenile subject.
This could include a relative, guardian, or close personal adult friend.
G. Abuse – Any physical injury, sexual or emotional abuse inflicted on a child, other
than by accidental means, by those responsible for his care, custody and control.
H. Neglect – Failure to provide, by those responsible for the care, custody and control of
the child, the proper and necessary support, education as required by law or medical,
surgical or other care necessary for the juvenile’s well-being.
Note: Any child who does not receive medical treatment by reason of the legitimate
practice of the religious belief of said child’s parents, guardian or other legally
responsible person, for that reason alone, shall not be considered to be an abused or

-- 2 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 3 of 13
neglected child. However, this does not preclude a court from ordering the proper
medical services.
I. Division – Missouri Children’s Division.
J. Status Offenses – Violations that apply only to juveniles and are not crimes if
committed by adults. Examples: truancy, curfew violations, incorrigible and runaway.
K. Certification – A juvenile is certified as an adult by a judge and thereafter tried as an
adult.
L. JJDP – Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act
M. OJJDP – Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
IV. TAKING JUVENILES INTO CUSTODY:
A. A juvenile can be taken into custody for any criminal or status offense. Normally, a
youth who has committed a status offense will not be accepted into the detention facility.
If a parent or guardian wants the police to take a juvenile into custody for a status
offense, (i.e. incorrigibility) the officer should have a criminal charge in addition to the
status offense. For example, the youth could have assaulted a family member, or taken
money or property from the household (stealing).
B. A full CARE report is required whenever a juvenile is taken into custody unless
otherwise directed by the Watch Commander. If a juvenile is taken into protective
custody, a full CARE report is always required. When a CARE report is completed,
officers should check the “Referred to Court” box in the CARE system. This will
automatically forward the report to the St. Louis County Family Court. The report will
be forwarded to the Juvenile Detective.
C. Under Missouri Supreme Court rules, a police officer may release a juvenile taken into
custody to the care of his/her custodian or other suitable adult unless the Family Court
has entered into an order to the contrary placing the juvenile in secure detention or
protective custody.
D. Officers will complete the “Log of Juveniles Detained and Confined” form, for all
juveniles taken into custody regardless if a full CARE report was completed or not. This
form was provided, and its use mandated, by the Missouri Department of Public Safety
and is located in the Juvenile Custody Log binder in the Juvenile Detention area.
V. POLICE REPORTS INVOLVING JUVENILE OFFENDERS:
A. When preparing any police report involving an offense committed by a juvenile, the
officer needs to include all pertinent information regarding the offender.

-- 3 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 4 of 13
1. Juvenile suspect names will not be continuously used in the narrative of a
report. The officer may use the juvenile’s name one time in the report and should
then after refer to the juvenile only as, “Juvenile # __.”
2. Juvenile CARE reports are distinguished by the red line at the top which reads,
“This report contains a Juvenile suspect(s).” The records clerk will forward the
original report to the Juvenile Detective. All juvenile reports and forms are filed
and secured by the Juvenile Detective.
3. The Olivette Police Department will maintain all juvenile records in accordance
with the guidelines set forth by the Missouri Secretary of State. The Olivette
Police Department will retain all juvenile records unless ordered by the St. Louis
County Juvenile Court to destroy, expunge, or seal at the age of 18.
VI. APPREHENSION PROCEDURES:
A. Apprehended juveniles will be transported without delay to the station or Juvenile
Detention Center, unless the juvenile needs emergency medical treatment. If the juvenile
is released, it is the arresting officer’s responsibility to ensure the juvenile is released to a
parent, guardian, or other responsible adult prior to ending his shift. If this is not
practical, he will notify his supervisor who will advise the on-coming watch commander
of the situation involving the juvenile.
B. Juveniles will be handled the same as an adult when conveying them to the Police
Department or Detention.
C. When a juvenile is taken into custody, a parent or guardian of the juvenile will be
notified as soon as practical.
D. Temporary Juvenile Holding Areas for Secure Holds – Juveniles may be held
securely in the Juvenile Holding Cell or in the lockable interview room on the second
floor of the Olivette Police Department. Sight and sound separation from adult offenders
will always be maintained. The arresting officer is responsible for the supervision and
welfare of the juvenile detainee (s).
1. Juveniles held on criminal charges may be detained in a temporary holding area
as outlined above and will have access to water, restrooms, and other needs by
requesting service from the arresting officer. An officer will visually monitor the
juvenile at a minimum of every twenty (20) minutes.
2. The maximum amount of time a juvenile may be securely held at the Olivette
Police Department before transfer to the Family Courts Detention Center or
released to a parent or guardian is 6 hours. The 6 hour period for release or
transfer will start immediately upon the Juvenile entering the Olivette Police
Department.

-- 4 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 5 of 13
3. At no time will juvenile detainees of the opposite sex be placed in a holding
area at the same time.
4. Juveniles will not be restrained to any objects in the holding area. In the event
of an emergency, or in the event the juvenile becomes violent, the juvenile should
be handcuffed per Department policy.
5. Holding areas will be checked for damage and working locks prior to placing
the juvenile inside. After the juvenile is removed, the room will be checked
again. Any new damage to the room will result with the juvenile being charged
with property damage.
6. Firearms and knives are not permitted in the holdover.
7. In an effort to prevent escapes, the temporary holding areas will always be
locked while holding juveniles. Juvenile escapes shall be reported immediately to
ECDC and the shift commander.
8. In the event of an emergency, officers will notify ECDC to request assistance.
9. Only sworn personnel will be allowed to enter a holding room in which a
juvenile is being detained.
E. Temporary Juvenile Holding areas for non-secure holds.
1. Juvenile Offenders taken into custody for a status offense MAY NOT be
securely held at any time. The Arresting Officer must have supervision of the
Juvenile 100% of the time they are in the Olivette Police Department or it is
considered a secure hold.
2. It is considered a “Secure Hold” if a Juvenile is placed in a room with a
lockable door or stationary cuffing device, regardless of how the locks are
intended to be used, if the door is open or closed, or if the cuffing device is
utilized.
3. The Juvenile must be placed in a room that does not have locks and provides
free egress from the building. The Olivette Police Department will utilize the
first floor visitation room and the second floor soft interview room ONLY for
non-secure holds. There are no locks on either of the doors and there are clearly
marked “EXIT” signs in proximity for egress purposes.
VII. INTERVIEWS AND INTERROGATIONS:
A. If a juvenile to be questioned is considered a victim or witness of an offense, the
Family Court need not be involved.

-- 5 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 6 of 13
B. Juveniles are afforded the same Constitutional Rights as an adult, outlined in the
Miranda Decision. Officers will ensure that the juvenile’s rights are protected. Only a
Deputy Juvenile Officer, in the presence of the juvenile’s parent, legal guardian or other
responsible adult, may advise the youth of these rights. The Waiver of Rights form for
juveniles, which is at Detention, will be used when Miranda Rights are given to a
juvenile. Note: If a parent/guardian is the victim, officers should locate a grandparent,
other relative or responsible adult for the juvenile rights procedure.
C. The juvenile, a parent, guardian or attorney can decide to invoke their Constitutional
Rights and not make a statement. If a juvenile has prior referrals with the Juvenile Court,
the officer should check with court officials to ensure the youth does not have a case
pending and a court appointed attorney. If the youth has a court appointed attorney, you
will not be able to conduct the interview without the attorney’s approval.
D. No more than two officers should interview a juvenile at one time and the duration of
the interview should be limited to a time reasonable to the age as well as the physical and
emotional condition of the child.
E. The interviewing officer(s) should explain to the juvenile and his/her parents, or legal
guardians, the process and procedures of the Department and Family Court relevant to the
investigation.
VIII. ST. LOUIS FAMILY COURT INTAKE:
A. If a juvenile is to be taken to Detention for admission, the arresting officer should first
call Detention to ensure there is space available. The officer may be directed to convey
the juvenile to another facility, such as Youth Emergency Services.
B. Juveniles taken into custody for the following serious offenses will be brought to
Juvenile Detention:
1. Class A and B felonies;
2. Class C felonies that are “crimes against persons”;
3. Any felony sex offense;
4. Any firearm or explosive device offense.
C. The following forms and reports are required for juvenile admission:
1. Two copies of the police report,
*Note: The police report must be completed by the end of the arresting
officer’s shift. The police report may then be faxed to the Detention
center.

-- 6 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 7 of 13
2. Initial Detention Admission form (two pages), and
3. Charge Affidavit.
D. Juveniles will generally not be accepted at Detention for status offenses.
IX. CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT:
A. If an officer has reasonable cause to suspect that a child has been or may be subjected
to abuse or neglect, or observes a child being subjected to conditions or circumstances
that would reasonably result in abuse or neglect, he shall make a written report of the
abuse or neglect.
B. Police officers are required by statute to report all cases of child abuse and neglect to
the Missouri Children’s Division. This is accomplished by a telephone call to the Child
Abuse/Neglect Hot-Line (1-800-392-3738). A preliminary investigation and CARE
report should be completed before the call is made.
C. Immunity from Liability – RSMo. 210.135 states any person, official, or institution’s
participation is good faith in the making of a report, or the removal or retaining of a child,
shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that otherwise might result by
reasons of such action.
D. Minor cases of neglect (an un-kept house, lack of supervision, etc.) should be
investigated by the Bureau of Field Operations officer receiving the original call. This
includes arrest and protective custody, if necessary.
E. For serious cases of child abuse/neglect, the watch commander will notify the Chief
of Police via the chain of command and the Detective Bureau. If a detective is not
available, a member of the Child Abuse/Neglect Unit of the St. Louis County Police
Department may be notified.
F. If an officer receives a call of a suspected child abuse or neglect and does not have
sufficient probable cause to take the child(ren) into protective custody, but feels the
situation might require further action, s/he may still Hotline the call. A police report with
the officer’s initial findings will be written. Children’s Division will act on the report,
usually within 24 hours.
G. When possible, photographs should be taken of the condition of the home and of the
children. If photos are to be taken of the children, prior consent of the Family Court is
not needed. However, the officer must advise the Family Court within 24 hours that the
photos were taken.
X. PROTECTIVE CUSTODY:

-- 7 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 8 of 13
A. A police officer or a physician may take or retain temporary protective custody of a
child who is the subject of a report of actual or suspected abuse or neglect, or who is
being examined by a physician for suspect abuse or neglect. Protective custody can be
taken without the consent of the child’s parents, guardian or other person legally
responsible for the child’s care after reasonable attempts have been made to advise
parents, or another responsible adult for the child’s care and when a court order cannot
immediately be obtained and conditions are such there exists an imminent danger to the
health or life of the child if s/he were not taken or retained in custody. This custody shall
not exceed twenty-four (24) hours.
B. The officer taking a child into temporary protective custody must notify the parents,
guardian or other legally responsible person for the child’s care, if their whereabouts are
known.
C. A Children's Division worker may not take a child into protective custody. The
decision is the Police Officer’s. The Officer has the responsibility for determining if
conditions exist that require a child be taken into protective custody. Several factors may
affect this decision:
1. Condition of the home: Is the home in disarray? Are there animal or human
feces in the residence, dirty dishes in the sink or about the household? Is there
food in the home, are there beds for the children to sleep in, do safety hazards
exist (drugs, broken windows, exposed wires, loaded weapons within easy reach)?
Check the refrigerator for contents.
2. Injuries: Check for abnormal bruising, burns, open sores and insect bites. Are
the children sexually active?
D. After a hotline call, the hotline clerk will notify the Children's Division, who will
assign a caseworker.
1. During normal business hours, the Children's Division worker will normally
meet the officer at the Family Court. The officer may transport the child directly
to the Family Court and request the assistance of the staff of the Family Court’s
Neglect Unit for preparation of appropriate paperwork.
2. After business hours, contact the Children's Division if not already involved.
The Children's Division worker will select the foster facility where the juvenile is
to be taken by the police officer. The Family Court should contact the foster
home prior to transporting the child there. It is the responsibility of the officer to
transport the child to a foster home. The Children's Division supervisor number is
314-615-2996.
E. Reports required:

-- 8 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 9 of 13
1. The reporting officer will prepare a “Protective Custody Admission Form” and
fax the completed form to the Detention Supervisor at 314-615-4469.
2. The completed police report should be forwarded to the Family Court by 0900
the day following placement. The report may be personally delivered to the
Neglect Unit or the Detention Center, 105 South Central Ave., or directed to the
Detention Supervisor via fax machine at 314-615-4519.
XI. CERTIFICATION OF JUVENILES:
A. A juvenile offender may be certified to stand trial as an adult. It is the responsibility
of the St. Louis County Family Court staff to determine if certification proceedings will
be initiated. Certification can be recommended for any serious felony.
B. If the offense is a serious felony, it is the officer’s responsibility to inform the youth at
the time of any interview and booking that:
1. S/he may be certified to stand trial as an adult.
2. The seriousness of the offense committed.
3. The consequences if tried and convicted.
C. Missouri Law now mandates that a certification hearing be held when a juvenile of
any age is charged with certain serious felony offenses. They are:
1. Murder 1st,
2. Murder 2nd,
3. Assault 1st,
4. Forcible Rape,
5. Forcible Sodomy
6. Robbery 1st, and
7. Distribution of narcotics.
XII. HANDLING OF CERTAIN OFFENSES:
A. Fugitives: A juvenile may be taken into custody as a fugitive of another department.
When a police officer has occasion to take into custody a juvenile who is “wanted” by
police authorities of another department, the officer should contact that department in
order to verify the active status of the wanted. It is the responsibility of the Department

-- 9 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 10 of 13
issuing the wanted to take custody of the juvenile and to fill out all appropriate
paperwork with the Family Court if admission is desired.
B. Failure to Appear: A 15 year-old or older individual wanted on an FTA warrant for a
traffic violation will be booked as an adult. They will be released to a parent, guardian,
or other responsible adult as soon as practical. Sight and sound separation must be
maintained at all times during the booking process.
C. Traffic Violations: Juveniles that are 15 and older will be cited and/or arrested for
misdemeanor traffic violations, and sent to the Municipal Court. If arrested, they will be
booked as an adult, but will not be put into the holdover with adult arrestees, and will be
released to a parent, guardian or responsible adult.
D. For traffic offenses and Failure to Appear (FTA) on traffic charges, booking includes
fingerprints and photographs pursuant to the usual adult booking procedures without
securing the prior consent of the Family Court. If a felony is involved, the juvenile must
be referred to the Family Court.
E. Driving While Intoxicated: 1st and 2nd DWI offenses are considered misdemeanors
and should be referred to adult traffic court. However, the 3rd DWI is deemed a felony
and must be referred to the Family Court.
F. Leaving the Scene of a Vehicle Accident: If the motor vehicle accident results in
property damage of less than $1000.00, the offense is a misdemeanor and the juvenile
driver is processed as an adult. However, if the property damage exceeds $1000.00 or if
personal injury is involved, the offense becomes a felony and must be referred to the
Family Court.
G. Any traffic violation committed by an individual under the age of 15 must be referred
to the Family Court, regardless of whether or not the offense constitutes a felony.
H. Possession of Drugs or Alcohol: A report is required. Do not issue a summons. The
juvenile may be released to his parents or taken to the Detention facility. For Officer
safety reasons, suspected drugs should not be field tested. The Family Court requires all
drug evidence, regardless of misdemeanor or felony charges, to be conveyed to the St.
Louis County Crime Lab for testing. The arresting officer shall notify the Detective
Bureau of a Juvenile drug arrest and a Detective will make arrangements and transport
the evidence to the lab.
I. Curfew: Curfew violators should be released to a parent or responsible adult, either at
the police department or their residence. A CARE report will be completed and referred
to the Family Court unless otherwise directed by a supervisor.
J. Truancy: Referrals should originate from the school authorities. Procedures exist by
which the school social workers can refer truants to the Court without police
involvement. Truancy is not an adequate cause for detention. If an officer takes a

-- 10 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 11 of 13
juvenile into custody during school hours, he/she may wish to contact the school to make
them aware of the juvenile’s whereabouts after first notifying the juvenile’s parent(s) or
guardian. If the juvenile is taken in to custody, a CARE report is required unless
otherwise directed by a supervisor.
XIII. PHOTOGRAPHS:
A. The rules applicable to photographs differ dependent upon the nature of the referral
being investigated by the police officer.
1. Felony Referrals – If the juvenile has been taken into custody for an offense
that would be considered a felony, the officer must photograph the juvenile.
2. Status or Misdemeanor Referrals – If the juvenile has been taken into custody
as a status offender or as the perpetrator of a misdemeanor offense, Court
authorization for photographing of the juvenile is required unless the
misdemeanor is a traffic offense. Officers wishing to photograph a juvenile in
this category must contact the Detention supervisor at 314-615-2996, who will
relay the request to the on-duty judicial officer.
3. Abuse/Neglect referrals – A juvenile who has been taken into custody as a
victim of abuse or neglect may be photographed as part of the police investigation
without the prior consent of the Family Court. However, the investigating police
officer must advise the Court within 24 hours that the photos were taken. Such
notification shall include the name of the juvenile, the juvenile’s date of birth, and
the date, time and location that the photos were taken. This notification can be
accomplished by making a telephone call to the Detention Supervisor at 314-615-
2996. The Detention Supervisor will record the appropriate information in a log
maintained for that purpose at the Center.
4. The following comments apply to the photographing of juveniles in general
and do not vary according to the nature of the referral involved.
a. Prior to photographing the juvenile, the attending officer will first
inspect the holding area of the holdover to ensure that it is free of adult
prisoners. (This includes temporary holding cells.) No juvenile is to be
brought into the booking area if an adult prisoner is present.
b. After photographing the juvenile with the Department’s digital camera,
the officer taking the photograph will place the photograph in a folder on
the PD server named “Juvenile Photos”. If there is more than one juvenile
photo, the photos must be renamed with the juvenile’s name. That officer
will immediately notify or leave notification via voicemail for the Juvenile
Detective, including the report number the photographs are associated
with. Those photos will then be transferred to the appropriate file.

-- 11 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 12 of 13
c. Law enforcement records concerning juveniles are to be kept
confidential. Photographs of the juvenile are considered part of the police
records and therefore are open for inspection or disclosure only by court
order.
XIV. FINGERPRINTING:
A. The rules applicable to fingerprinting vary according to the nature of the referral
being investigated by the police officer.
1. Felony Referrals – If a juvenile is taken into custody for an offense that would
be considered a Felony, the officer must fingerprint the juvenile on juvenile
fingerprint cards.
2. Abuse, Neglect, Status or Misdemeanor Referrals – If the juvenile has been
taken into custody as a victim of abuse or neglect, as a status offender or as the
perpetrator of misdemeanor offense (except traffic), Court authorization for
juvenile is required. The Family Court requires that a police officer requesting
the Court’s permission to fingerprint a juvenile in this category first complete an
affidavit setting out information regarding the incident being investigated and a
summary by the officer of the facts that he believes connects the juvenile with the
incident. The judicial officers will base their decisions upon the information
contained in the affidavit. Affidavits are also available through the Detention
Center staff by calling 314-615-2996.
3. The following comments apply to fingerprinting of juveniles in general and do
not vary according to the nature of the referral involved.
a. Prior to fingerprinting the juvenile, the attending officer will first
inspect the holding area to ensure that it is free of adult prisoners; this
includes the temporary holding cells. No juvenile is to be brought to the
booking area if an adult prisoner is present.
b. Two sets of fingerprints are required using the Missouri State Highway
Patrol Juvenile Fingerprint Cards or the Juvenile mode on the Livescan
machine. No AFIS or Single Print Cards are to be used.
c. Fill out both print cards in their entirety, except for the box marked
“Local Offense Cycle Number.” Leave that blank.
d. To print the cards from Livescan, select the “Submit” tab. Check the
boxes next to “Juvenile Card” and “Juvenile Court Card”. 2 copies of
each card are required.
e. Deposit the juvenile print cards in the Juvenile Detective’s mailbox.

-- 12 of 13 --

OPD - 25.1
Page 13 of 13
f. The Juvenile Detective will transport the print cards to the St. Louis
County Fingerprint Lab.
XV. PROCEDURES NOT COVERED:
For situations not covered in this policy, refer to the Family Court of St. Louis County
Procedure Manual, available in report room. Family Court may also be contacted at 314-
615-4400 during normal business hours and 314-615-2996 after hours.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Col. Beth Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 1/25/2010
Revised: 12/12/2011
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 10/26/2016
Revised: 3/13/2018
Revised: 6/19/2018
Revised: 7/5/2018
Revised: 7/20/2018
Revised: 7/10/2020
Revised: 2/23/2021
Revised: 6/22/2022
Revised: 8/28/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 13 of 13 --

