OPD - 26.3
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Off Duty Arrests
OFF-DUTY ARRESTS
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish procedures for arrests made by off-
duty officers of the Olivette Police Department.
B. Off-duty officers are often faced with situations involving criminal conduct that they
are neither equipped or prepared to handle in the same manner as if they were on duty.
This may lead to unnecessary injuries to off-duty officers, and confusion for those on-
duty officers arriving at the scene trying to correctly assess the facts. In order to promote
safety and the most efficient operations, it is the policy of this Police Department to
determine and regulate those situations and locations within which an officer is permitted
to make an arrest while off-duty.
II. LIABILITY PROTECTION:
Officers have liability protection for the on and off-duty performance of official duties.
This protection does not extend to willful acts to cause injury or damage, or to those
actions that the police officer knew, or reasonably should have known, were in conflict
with law, or the established policies of the Department.
III. OFF-DUTY RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. While off-duty, it is the responsibility of the officer to immediately report any
suspected or observed criminal activities to on-duty officers of the jurisdiction where the
activities are occurring.
B. Except as allowed by this policy, off-duty officers should not enforce summary
offenses or minor violations such as harassment, disorderly conduct or other quality-of-
life offenses. On-duty personnel of the affected jurisdiction shall be contacted to respond
to the situation where an off-duty officer becomes aware of such violations.
C. Where an arrest is necessary, the off-duty arresting officer shall abide by all
Departmental policies and procedures.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 26.3
Page 2 of 2
IV. PERMITTED OFF-DUTY ARRESTS:
When off-duty and within the City of Olivette, a police officer may make an arrest only
when:
1. The arresting officer is not personally involved in the incident underlying the
arrest, and
2. There is an immediate need for the prevention of a crime or apprehension of a
suspect, and
3. The crime would be normally charged as a confinable offense requiring a full
custody arrest, and
4. The arresting officer is in possession of proper police identification.
V. PROHIBITED OFF-DUTY ARRESTS:
Officers may not make an arrest off-duty when:
1. The arresting officer is personally involved in the incident underlying the
arrest, or
2. Engaged in secondary employment of a non-police nature and the officer's
actions are only in furtherance of the interests of the private employer.
3. When the arrest is made solely as enforcement of a minor traffic regulation.
Despite the fact that a police officer has police powers and responsibilities 24
hours a day throughout this jurisdiction, the off-duty officer should not enforce
minor traffic regulations.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 5/29/2020
Revised: 2/13/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

