OPD – 26.4
Page 1 of 8
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Special Events
________________________________________________________________________
SPECIAL EVENTS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this general order is to establish uniform procedures for special events.
II. POLICY:
In the interest of public safety, the Olivette Police Department will frequently provide
security, crowd and traffic control during special events held within the City, such as
parades, dignitary arrivals, concerts in the park, Turkey Trot and other similar functions.
These functions may be performed independently or in cooperation with other law
enforcement agencies. However, as each event is unique and presents a different set of
circumstances, the procedures established herein are basic in nature and are subject to
those modifications necessary to meet the needs of the situation.
III. PROCEDURE:
A. Authority and Responsibility
1. The planning coordinator of special events shall be appointed as needed by the
Chief of Police and will be responsible for primary planning and coordination of
special events.
2. The planning coordinator will meet with event representatives and determine
the role the Police Department is expected to perform during the planned
function.
3. Personnel and equipment requirements will then be coordinated with the
Command Staff of the Department and such other outside agencies that may be
involved.
4. A deployment plan in the form of a special event document will be drafted and,
following approval by the Chief of Police, disseminated to appropriate personnel.

-- 1 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 2 of 8
5. Upon approval by the Chief of Police, a briefing will be held with appropriate
personnel to review assignments, responsibilities, communications and other
details.
6.The planning coordinator or his designee will make every effort to be present
on-site during critical periods of the special event and shall serve as the primary
project officer. He/she will be responsible for operational interaction with various
City departments and private agencies.
a. If the planning coordinator is unable to be present at the event, he/she
will ensure that his/her designee is provided with all necessary information
and assignments.
7. The planning coordinator will notify the East Central Dispatch Center and
provide the following information:
a. Day, date, time and location of event;
b. Estimated duration, including start and end times;
c. Road closures or detour routes; if applicable
d. Parade routes, if applicable;
e. Additional personnel requirements;
f. Communication requirements;
g. Any contact information or other pertinent information relevant to the
event for those who call for public information;
h. Officers participating in the event will be listed on a “special events”
duty roster that will be faxed to ECDC.
B. Elements of Special Events Planning
1. Pre-event estimates: Crowd estimates, based upon previous event experience,
will be prepared and included in the event planning document. Such figures shall
then be utilized as a guide to determine the adequate allocation of personnel and
equipment to the event site and surrounding areas.
2. Equipment & Logistical Considerations: Planning efforts shall include the
types and amount of equipment deemed necessary to accompany a personnel
deployment, along with logistical routes and temporary parking including storage
areas.

-- 2 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 3 of 8
a. The location(s) of the equipment will be clearly stated on appropriate
situation maps and the information disseminated to assigned personnel.
b. Equipment such as barricades, traffic cones, etc., will be obtained from
the Olivette Police and Public Works Departments’. Such items may be
pre-positioned for Departmental use or requisitioned as specific needs
arise.
c. Other logistical considerations such as transportation, food, water, etc.,
will generally be the responsibility of each individual officer, though one
or more of such needs may be satisfied by the event staff.
3. Inter/Intra Departmental Coordination: The planning coordinator will
coordinate the assignment and cooperation, as needed, of:
a. Personnel and resources to the event with Department commanders;
b. Other City departments affected;
c. The event management/operations staff;
d. Business/community groups; and
e. Such other law enforcement agencies as may be involved.
f. Once Department personnel have been deployed, members assigned to
the event will cooperate fully with other participants in an effort to ensure
a successful function.
4. Traffic Direction and Control: Planning for each special event shall include an
assessment on the impact the event will have on traffic.
a. Parking restrictions, traffic signal control, road closures, and detours
will be initiated as circumstances require.
b. These will be noted on the special event document situation maps, and
officers shall be assigned to all critical intersections.
5. Operations/Deployment Report: The planning coordinator will draft and the
Chief of Police will approve an operations/deployment report prior to the date the
special event is scheduled to occur. Each special event document shall include:
a. The sponsor of the event;
b. Contact person(s);

-- 3 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 4 of 8
c. Dates and times the event is to take place;
d. Geographic are affected;
e. Number of people expected to attend;
f. Personnel assignments (fixed posts/mobile units), uniform wear;
g. Command post and command authority;
h. Communications;
i. Medical resources;
j. Traffic and parking control requirements;
k. Logistical requirements;
l. Public and media relations;
m. Potential threats; and
n. Emergency Contingency Plan
6. Command and Control: Prior to any special event, the planning coordinator will
meet with the Chief of Police and Command Staff to determine whether a
designated on-site command post will be established for the event.
a. Criteria used to determine the need for a command post will include:
i. Estimated size of the event, to include estimated crowd size.
ii. Type of event and potential for criminal or unruly activity.
iii. Number of personnel required to meet the needs of the event.
b. If it is determined that an on-site command post will be established:
i. The command post will serve as the communications interface
between the Department and other City departments. It will also
provide centralized command and control over those personnel
assigned to the event.
ii. The command post shall be adequately marked as such and
equipped with radios, cellular telephones and other equipment as
may be needed.

-- 4 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 5 of 8
iii. The Police Department may be utilized as a command post in
those instances where it is determined that an on-site command
post is not necessary.
c. Situational maps shall be utilized by personnel as a critical resource in
the management of a special event. Such maps may be used to plot parade
routes, event sites, specialized/restricted parking areas, traffic control
points, medical treatment areas, mobile and fixed perimeter posts, ingress
and egress points, command post, staging areas, etc.
d. Where a situation arises that either exceeds the technical expertise held
by Department personnel, or threatens to expand beyond available
manpower resources, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may request
assistance from adjoining municipalities and/or the St. Louis County
Police Department. Examples of specialized assistance units may be St.
Louis County’s Arson and Explosives and/or Tactical Operations Unit.
e. The planning coordinator will maintain ongoing communications with
the event management staff and coordinate field operations in a
cooperative effort. Problems and/or changes in operational plans shall be
discussed and joint corrective action taken.
f. The planning coordinator will maintain communications with ECDC
and will ensure that dispatchers remain informed of which personnel are
on and off duty during the event.
7. Communications: During special events, communications shall routinely be
conducted via radio and telephone.
a. When the Department has sole responsibility to provide security for the
event, the planning coordinator will coordinate with ECDC to determine
which radio channels will be utilized for communication by those involved
in the event.
i. In most cases, communications should be conducted on the
Police Department inter-ops channel (ECDC EVENT 1 or 2),
which would provide the following:
a) Provide car-to-car traffic without going through the
dispatcher;
b) Provide communications with the Fire Department;
c) All radio traffic is recorded; and

-- 5 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 6 of 8
d) Dispatch would not normally monitor the inter-ops
channel if just used for communications at an event;
however, a dispatcher could be assigned to the event on the
inter-ops channel, if necessary.
b. Should other agencies be involved, communications will be conducted
on the designated frequency.
c. Officers assigned to work a special event shall utilize the designated call
sign in the event plan or their DSN as an identifier.
i. For those events where only Olivette personnel are involved,
officers will be assigned a “special detail” call sign in the 6490
series.
ii. For those events where personnel from other jurisdictions are
involved, officers will use their Department name and DSN (e.g.,
Olivette 148) unless instructed otherwise.
d.Telephone communications may be conducted by either land-line or
cellular phones.
e. The East Central Dispatch Center’s (ECDC) duty supervisor will ensure
that a sufficient number of communications personnel are on duty for
coverage of special events.
8. Field Operations:
a. Fixed posts, traffic posts, walking beats, bicycle patrols and mobile
beats will be designated as necessary in the initial planning document.
Those areas may be manned by one or more officers, who shall maintain
their positions until properly relieved.
b. Supervisors assigned to oversee uniformed subordinates shall
periodically check on each of the fixed posts associated with an event and
report problems to the command post.
c. Relief: Supervisors shall be responsible for establishing a relief
schedule for subordinate employees, which may include shifting
employees to different post locations at regular intervals, or by utilizing a
designated relief officer to temporarily man a specific post.
d. Uniforms: Assigned uniforms for Department employees may vary
according to the event. As such, specific instructions detailing proper
uniform attire shall be included as part of each planning document.

-- 6 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 7 of 8
e. Arrest / Reporting Requirements: Procedures for handling arrests made
at a large event may vary according to the event. As such, specific
instructions detailing the proper handling and processing of arrests shall be
included as part of each planning document. Officers making the arrests
shall then be responsible for any associated reports.
i. For incidents involving civil disturbances or mass arrests,
officers will refer to General Order OPD - 26.2 “Mass Arrests”.
9. Medical Support: Medical units will be supplied by the Fire Department and
should be actively involved in each major special event. Medical units should be
deployed in accordance with the requirements of the event. This may require an
on-site presence or simply the dedication of medical units to be placed in reserve
for emergency deployment.
a. Communications between the Police Department and medical units shall
be maintained via radio or cell phone communications in the event of a
medical emergency.
b. Mercy Hospital will normally serve as the primary health care provider;
however, medical unit personnel shall determine which health care
provider will be utilized based on the specific medical condition
encountered.
c. Staging Area: The Fire Department shall be allocated adequate parking
and storage space, generally on the periphery of an event to stage its
vehicles and personnel.
d. Treatment Area: If a large crowd is anticipated at an event, medical
personnel will generally establish a medical treatment area within the
event site. It shall be manned by paramedics and/or other trained medical
personnel to provide emergency medical services as needed.
10. Public Information: Generally, management staff or sponsors of a special
event shall be responsible to release all news information in connection with the
event. However, the Chief of Police may exercise such authority when public
safety issues arise, or when directly approached by the news media and requested
to comment.
C. After-Action Report
1. At the conclusion of a major event, the planning coordinator will schedule a
meeting with appropriate participants to review the event in its entirety to
determine positive and negative aspects of the operation.

-- 7 of 8 --

OPD – 26.4
Page 8 of 8
2. The planning coordinator will submit an after-action report to the Chief of
Police.
a. The report will incorporate all aspects of the Department’s operation in
the event.
b. The report will address both positive and negative aspects of the
function and will include recommendations for planning and executing
future special events
D. Plan Review: The patrol commanders will review special event plans on an annual
basis. A written review including all pertinent changes incorporated into the various
copies will be distributed to Department personnel, as may be appropriate.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 7/18/2018
Revised: 2/23/2021
Revised: 2/13/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 8 of 8 --

