OPD - 28.1
Page 1 of 2
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Crime Analysis
CRIME ANALYSIS
I. PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish a crime analysis function and
provide the ways and means of collecting, analyzing and disseminating information
regarding criminal activity and calls for service, allowing for directed response to crime.
B. Crime analysis is used to provide useful information to aid operational personnel in
meeting the tactical crime control and prevention objectives. This can be accomplished
by identifying and analyzing methods of operation of individual criminals, providing
crime pattern recognition, as well as analysis of data from field operations and arrests.
Crime analysis may also be useful in long term planning for the Department.
II. CRIME ANALYSIS RESPONSIBILITY:
A. The crime analysis function is the responsibility of the Bureau of Investigations.
B. Data to be analyzed may include but is not limited to:
1. C.A.R.E. Crime Records Management,
2. CAD dispatching data,
3. Uniform Crime Reports, and
4. Daily notable activity reports from the Bureau of Field Operations.
C. Analysis of crime will include documentation, analysis, and reporting of the following
factors:
1. Type – by UCR classification of crime or activity.
2. Frequency – by number of crimes and comparisons to like periods.

-- 1 of 2 --

OPD - 28.1
Page 2 of 2
3. Temporal – day, date, and time of offenses as determined from all available
sources.
4. Geographic – by address, sector, and COGIS area.
5. Victim or target description – by likeness or similarity.
6. Known suspect or suspect vehicle information – based on victim or witness
description.
7. Modus Operandi – by method or signature characteristics of the suspect.
8. Physical evidence – including lab or latent print analysis reports.
III. FREQUENCY OF CRIME ANALYSIS:
At a minimum, analysis will be ongoing and will be reported to the Chief of Police and
Commanders monthly. Developing patterns or problem areas should be reported
immediately to the Chief of Police and Commanders.
IV. DISTRIBUTION OF CRIME ANALYSIS REPORTS:
A. Crime Analysis Reports will be given to the Chief of Police and the Commanders of
each Bureau. Additionally, the information may be distributed to outside law
enforcement agencies and Neighborhood Watch groups. Sensitive information in
analysis reports should remain confidential so as not to impede investigations or
prosecutions.
B. Feedback and evaluation of the analysis reports is important in keeping the data
accurate and useful. Requests for additional information, reporting errors in analysis
reports, or other comments and suggestions, should be reported to the Bureau of
Investigations in memorandum form.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/24/2009
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 2/23/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 2 of 2 --

