OPD - 28.2
Page 1 of 5
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Automated License Plate Readers
ALPR
LPR
FLOCK
AUTOMATED LICENSE PLATE READERS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to provide guidelines for the Olivette Police
Department use of the Automated License Plate Recognition (ALPR or LPR) system and
ALPR data.
II. POLICY:
The Olivette Police Department currently contracts with a third-party service provider for
its Automated License Plate Recognition system. It is the policy of the Olivette Police
Department to use Automated License Plate Recognition legally and ethically for official
and legitimate law enforcement purposes.
The use of ALPR systems and ALPR data is restricted to employees who are trained and
authorized to use the system and ALPR data for authorized purposes only. Employees
will follow the procedures for ALPR system use as set forth by the service provider and
as outlined in this General Order. Any misuse of the ALPR system or ALPR data by
employees is strictly prohibited and may result in disciplinary action.
III. DEFINITIONS:
A. Automated License Plate Reader System (ALPRs): a system provided, installed,
and maintained by a service provider. Components of the system include a camera that
automatically captures data; software systems that interpret, catalog, store, and purge
data; and an interface where authorized employees can access data.

-- 1 of 5 --

OPD - 28.2
Page 2 of 5
B. ALPR Camera: A high-speed, computer-controlled camera that automatically
captures ALPR data. ALPR cameras are in fixed locations, mobile, or attached to police
cars.
C. ALPR Data: Information captured, cataloged, and stored by the service provider and
accessed by an authorized employee through a software interface. This information can
be collected by the ALPR system, derived from the ALPR interface, or provided by the
System Provider. ALPR Data can include but is not limited to: reports of date, time, and
locations; summary and usage reports, photos, vehicle characteristics, and license plate
characteristics.
D. Alerts or hits: An automated notification is received through the ALPR interface
when the ALPR system compares data to a Hot List or other parameters defined by an
authorized employee.
E. Authorized Employee: An employee who is granted access to the ALPR interface.
F. Hot Lists: Lists or databases of license plates created by Criminal Justice Information
Systems. The lists are automatically loaded into the ALPR system by the system
provider. Data analyzed by ALPR’s is cross-referenced against the lists to generate Alerts
or hits.
G. Service Provider: The Department engages in a contract to provide ALPR services.
An ALPR service provider who provides installation, maintenance, and digital storage of
data.
H. System Manager: A member of the Olivette Police Department who is responsible
for the administration of the ALPR program. The System manager administers users and
access to the ALPR system; coordinates the installation and maintenance of the system;
ensures the ALPR system/cameras are functioning properly; and conducts audits as
necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of the law and this policy.
IV. GUIDELINES FOR USE
A. Prior to using the ALPR system, authorized employees will receive training on the
ALPR system. Generally, this will occur during the field training process and will be
completed by the Field Training Instructor, a Supervisor, or System Manager. Training
should include an overview of the system, security of information, handling of ALPR
data, familiarization with the ALPR interface, and a review of this policy. Periodically,
the System Manager may coordinate familiarization and refresher sessions with the
Service Provider to provide in-person training on the ALPR system.
B. Police Department ALPR Cameras will be deployed in a manner that is determined to
be in the best interest of the community and the Department. Locations for ALPR
cameras will be determined by an analysis of information including, but not limited to
crime data and trends.

-- 2 of 5 --

OPD - 28.2
Page 3 of 5
C. An ALPR system shall be used for official and legitimate law enforcement purposes.
An ALPR system may be used in conjunction with any official Department operation,
including criminal investigation or Department related civil or administrative actions.
D. Reasonable suspicion or probable cause is not necessary before querying ALPR data
however, a query should only be conducted for legitimate law enforcement purposes.
E. An alert/hit from the ALPR system by itself does not amount to probable cause for
non-consensual detention. However, an alert/hit combined with other observations,
reasonable suspicion, or probable cause can justify a contact. Absent other articulable
factors, ALPR alerts/hits shall be verified through Criminal Justice Information Systems
prior to any contact with a vehicle and/or occupants.
F. On-duty Officers assigned to a patrol function or special operation should monitor the
ALPR interface for alerts/hits as part of their regular duties. Authorized employees are
encouraged to use ALPR data in conjunction with their investigations. For instance,
employees should query ALPR data when information is reported in criminal
investigations such as partial license plates, vehicle characteristics, or location
information.
1.When conducting a query of ALPR data, a reason is required to be entered to
conduct the search. The reason shall consist of the report number, or CAD
incident number of the investigation. If a report number or CAD incident number
has not been generated, the specific crime with level of severity associated with
the query should be used (i.e. felony assault, misdemeanor theft, felony stolen
vehicle etc.) Officers should be as specific as possible in their reasoning and avoid
using only generic terms such as investigation, wanted, etc.
2. Officers can manually enter license plate information directly into the ALPR
system through the interface to generate a custom Hot list of local alerts/hits if
they have reasonable suspicion to believe the entered license plate is associated
with a crime. Local alerts/hits are reserved for license plates that are not being
entered into NCIC but, are to be monitored as part of a legitimate law
enforcement investigation.
3. If a license plate is entered into NCIC, it will automatically be monitored by the
ALPR system and should not be entered to generate local alerts/hits.
4. Once the entering officer is made aware the local alert is no longer valid, they
should immediately remove the alert from the ALPR system. NCIC alerts will
automatically be removed from the ALPR system with the removal of the entry
after NCIC cancellation.
G. Notification settings for ALPR alerts/hits may vary based on many relevant factors.
Patrol Officers and Patrol Supervisors should login and receive alerts/hits via

-- 3 of 5 --

OPD - 28.2
Page 4 of 5
desktop/MDT notification during their shift. Officers will have the discretion to activate
SMS and/or Email alerts/hits. Officers should use their best judgment to determine the
level, extent, and threshold for ALPR alerts/hits they receive while on duty.
H. When an ALPR alert/hit leads to an arrest or the creation of a police report, the
reporting officer shall include the use of the ALPR in the narrative of the report.
I. Any technical or maintenance issues concerning the ALPR or system shall be brought
to the attention of the ALPR System Manager who will coordinate with the service
provider to address the issue.
J. Misuse of the ALPR equipment and associated databases or data may result in
disciplinary action.
V. DATA SECURITY AND ACCESS:
A. The ALPR service provider supplies an interface where users can access, search, and
view data captured by ALPR systems for official use only. The System Manager
determines who is an authorized employee based on their assigned duties. In general, all
commissioned officers will be provided access to the ALPR system and other personnel
as necessary.
B. Data security and access will be maintained with the following safeguards:
1. The ALPR System Provider will maintain data security and data access in
compliance with our contractual agreement, appropriate industry standards, and
applicable laws.
2. The Department will control and restrict access to the ALPR system and its
data to authorized employees who will be issued a unique username and
password. Officers should only use their own unique login credentials to access
the system and not that of any other officer. The System Manager will ensure all
authorized employees maintain their access and revoke access when appropriate.
The Service Provider will ensure the ALPR system records any data access, who
accessed the information, what information was accessed, and when.
3. Authorized employees are permitted to access the data for legitimate law
enforcement purposes only.
4. ALPR data is shared with other law enforcement agencies through Criminal
Justice Information Systems and the ALPR system.
VI. ALPR DATA COLLECTION AND RETENTION

-- 4 of 5 --

OPD - 28.2
Page 5 of 5
A. The ALPR Service Provider offers software and hardware solutions for automatic
license plate detection. The Service Provider creates images and records of vehicles and
provides notifications about suspected vehicles to users based on instructions of the end
user (Olivette Police Officers).
B. All footage is stored no longer than 30 days by the Service Provider in compliance
with the Service Provider’s retention policy. Officers and Investigators are responsible
for downloading and archiving footage from the Service Provider cloud servers prior to
the purge date if it is needed for evidentiary reasons.
C. If the ALPR data becomes evidence in a criminal or civil action, or it is reasonable to
believe the ALPR data will be subject to a lawful subpoena, the data should be retained
and entered as evidence.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 10/9/2023
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 5 of 5 --

