OPD - 28.3
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Facial Recognition
FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines for the implementation and
acceptable use of facial recognition technology.
II. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to use facial recognition technology legally and
ethically as a legitimate investigative tool for law enforcement purposes. This policy shall apply
to all employees who are authorized access to any facial recognition system and are permitted to
request facial recognition searches. Employees will follow the procedures for system use as set
forth by the service provider’s acceptable use policy and as outlined in this General Order. Any
misuse by employees of the facial recognition system or data obtained is strictly prohibited and
may result in disciplinary action.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY – A biometric software application that uses
specific proprietary algorithms to compare facial features from one specific picture - a probe
image - to many others to determine the most likely candidate for further investigation.
B. PROBE IMAGE – An image of an unidentified person lawfully obtained pursuant to an
authorized criminal investigation used by facial recognition software for comparison with the
face images contained within a face image repository.
C. INVESTIGATIVE LEAD – Any information which could potentially aid in the successful
resolution of an investigation but does not imply positive identification of a subject or that the
subject is guilty of a criminal act.
IV. GUIDELINES FOR USE
A. Any deployment of facial recognition technology is for official law enforcement use only and
is law enforcement sensitive. Authorized uses of facial recognition technology:

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 28.3
Page 2 of 3
1. When there is reasonable suspicion that an identifiable individual has committed a
criminal offense, is involved in criminal conduct, or poses a threat to any individual,
the community, or the nation. This includes individuals involved in or planning
terrorist activities.
2. To support ongoing investigations into criminal activities or homeland security
threats, providing crucial leads and identification capabilities.
3. To assist in identifying individuals who are unable to identify themselves due to
incapacitation, including deceased individuals or those who are at risk, such as
missing persons, vulnerable adults, or children.
4. To verify and corroborate information obtained through tips and leads in the course of
an investigation, ensuring the accuracy and reliability of the information received.
5. To aid in identifying individuals who may be witnesses or victims in cases of violent
crime, thus assisting in the investigative process and ensuring their protection and
assistance.
B. Potential matches returned by a facial recognition system are not a form of positive
identification and results are to be considered an investigative lead only and shall not be used as
the sole basis for detention, arrest, identification, or request for a warrant.
C. Any possible connection or involvement of a subject identified through a facial recognition
system should be confirmed through further investigative measures.
D. Employees who utilize facial recognition technology shall document use in the associated
police report.
E. Employees who utilize facial recognition technology shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws and regulations, including the CJIS Security Policy.
V. PROHIBITED USE
A. The Olivette Police Department prohibits access to and use of facial recognition technology,
including dissemination of facial recognition search results, for the following:
1. Must not be used for personal purposes or non-law enforcement activities.
2. Must not be used to monitor or investigate individuals or groups based solely on their
religious, political, or social views or activities; their participation in noncriminal
organizations or lawful events; or their races, ethnicities, citizenships, places of origin,
ages, disabilities, genders, gender identities, sexual orientations, or any other
classification protected by law.

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 28.3
Page 3 of 3
3. Must not be used to harass, intimidate, or unlawfully surveil any individual or group.
4. Must not be used in a manner that violates the privacy rights of individuals, including
unlawful surveillance and data collection.
B. Employees who utilize facial recognition technology will protect the confidentiality of all data
accessed through the software and will not disclose it to unauthorized individuals.
C. Unauthorized access to or use of the facial recognition technology or the data contained
within is strictly prohibited and only employees who have been granted access rights by the
Olivette Police Department may use the technology.
D. Employees who misuse facial recognition technology will be subject to disciplinary action up
to and including termination and potentially other applicable criminal penalties.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 6/6/2024
Revised: 6/13/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

