OPD - 29.1
Page 1 of 11
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Training Coordinator
Attendance Requirement for Training
Travel Expense Reimbursement
Department Training Instructors
Required Training
Continuing Education
Maintenance of Training Records
In-Service Training
Academy and Probationary Officer Training
Field Training Program
Career Development
TRAINING
I. PURPOSE:
Training at all levels within the Department is the single most important aspect of a law
enforcement agency’s administration. The purpose of this General Order is to outline
specific areas of training and establish a method to determine the training needs of
Department personnel.
II. POLICY:
It shall be the policy of this Department to provide training to maintain and enhance job
knowledge, skills and abilities; introduce new technologies, methods, or equipment; and
to ensure that all personnel remain current with new laws, policies and procedures.

-- 1 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 2 of 11
III. TRAINING COORDINATOR:
The Deputy Chief will coordinate all Department training and reporting related to
Missouri P.O.S.T continuing education requirements. The Deputy Chief will also
coordinate notifications made to the Missouri P.O.S.T. licensing section related to hiring
and separation of commissioned Police Officers.
IV. TRAINING RESPONSIBILITES:
A. It is the responsibility of every employee to recognize areas in which additional
training would benefit their performance and career goals.
B. It is the responsibility of every supervisor and commander to recognize areas in which
the employees under his/her command would benefit from remedial or specialized
training and to assist that employee in obtaining such training.
C. It is the responsibility of the Deputy Chief to assist the Command Staff in identifying
and obtaining training programs for the Department. The Deputy Chief will work with
the Command Staff to ensure the employees receive specialized and P.O.S.T. mandated
training. Scheduling and coordinating of training will be conducted by the Deputy Chief,
working in conjunction with each respective bureau/shift commander.
D. The Chief of police will prepare regular training reports, as well as an annual report.
summarizing training for the Department.
V. ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Employees attending P.O.S.T. approved continuing education training at the St. Louis
County and Municipal Police Academy are subject to the attendance requirements of the
P.O.S.T. Commission.
B. Employees attending initial or continuing education training at a training provider
other than the St. Louis County and Municipal Police Academy shall comply with the
provider’s attendance requirements to receive the appropriate certificate, diploma, award
or other documentation indicative of successful completion of the course of instruction.
If the training is P.O.S.T. approved, employees are subject to the attendance requirements
of the P.O.S.T. Commission.
VI. PROCEDURES FOR TRAINING:
A. Officers or their supervisors may submit requests for training, but the Deputy Chief
will register, and schedule officers as required to meet the needs of the Department and
P.O.S.T. requirements.
1. Supervisors will be aware of the training needs of their platoon and ensure that
their officers receive training as necessary.

-- 2 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 3 of 11
2. Training requests will be submitted through the chain of command for final
approval by the Deputy Chief.
3. The Deputy Chief will forward approved requests to the appropriate training
provider.
B. Attendance at Training:
1. Arrive promptly and attend the full period of instruction as scheduled.
2. The officer will wear proper classroom attire as required by the training
provider.
3. If unable to attend scheduled training due to a valid reason:
a. The officer will submit a memo through the chain of command to the
Deputy Chief, detailing the reason he/she cannot attend the training; and
b. A telephone call will be placed by the officer to the Deputy Chief
before the training begins;
c. The Deputy Chief will notify the training provider that the officer will
not be attending as scheduled.
VII. TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT:
Approved travel expenses will be reimbursed by the City for transportation, meals and
lodging.
1. An expense report must be submitted to Chief of police.
2. All receipts applicable to qualified training reimbursement must be turned in
to the Deputy Chief at the conclusion of the training.
VIII. DEPARTMENT TRAINING INSTRUCTORS:
A. The Department does not have any full-time personnel assigned as instructors.
Personnel assigned to train officers will have documented instructor training, and the
training will be periodically updated.
B. The Department requires lesson plans for all training courses conducted by the
Agency, to include provisions for the following:

-- 3 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 4 of 11
1. Guidelines and format for lesson plan development. The lesson plan
development is based on the format taught to the police instructors at instructor’s
training.
2. A statement of performance and job-related objectives should be included in
the lesson plans.
3. The content of the lesson plan shall ensure that:
a. The subject(s) to be covered is completely and accurately addressed;
b. The lesson is properly sequenced with other training materials;
c. The purpose of instruction meets objectives;
d. The materials to be taught are identified;
e. The teaching techniques are appropriate;
f. Relationships are made to the job task;
g. Responsibilities of participants for materials are covered; and
h. Evaluation criteria are covered.
.
4. Appropriate instructional techniques to be incorporated are:
a. Conference (debate, discussion groups, panels and seminars);
b. Field experiences (interviews, operational experiences and
observations);
c. Presentations (lecture – discussion)
d. Problem investigations (committee inquiry); and
e. Simulation (case study, games and role play)
5. A process for approval of lesson plans; the Deputy Chief approves the lesson
plans.
6. Identification of any tests used in the training process; if a testing procedure is
required, it will be stated in the lesson plan.
IX. REQUIRED TRAINING:

-- 4 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 5 of 11
A. Mandated by statute or order to further Department policy:
1. Training offered by a recognized provider that meets the requirements of the
P.O.S.T. Commission for continuing education;
2. Training and/or licensing necessary due to the introduction of new equipment,
including firearms and special purpose vehicles, unless proficiency and/or
licensing can be demonstrated. Absent proper training or demonstrated
proficiency and/or licensing, an employee will not be allowed to operate or utilize
the new equipment or vehicle(s).
3. Annual in-service training. Sworn personnel will successfully complete in-
service training that includes but is not limited to:
a. Livescan Training (re-certification every two (2) years);
b. B.A.C. Operator Training (re-certification required every two (2)
years);
c. REJIS Operator Training (re-certification required every two (2) years);
d. Bias Based Policing Training (initial training by newly hired employees
and annually thereafter by all employees);
e. Weapons Training, including Response to Resistance or Aggression
Policy Review:
1). Firearms Training - Authorized weapon training and
proficiency testing including both on and off-duty weapons (re-
certification required annually);
2). Taser Training (re-certification required annually);
3). OC Spray Training (re-certification required biennially);
f. Contagious Disease and Personal Protection Equipment Training
(required annually);
g. CPR & Basic First Aid (re-certification required every two (2) years);
h. Detention Area (required every 4 years);
i. Fire Suppression - Detention Area (required every 4 years); and
j. Other topics related to the duties of a police officer, to include, but not
exclusive to;

-- 5 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 6 of 11
1). Legal update and review;
2). Arrests;
3). Search and seizure;
4). Criminal and civil rights;
5). Interview and interrogation;
6). Investigations;
7). Response to resistance or aggression;
8). Criminal and civil liabilities;
9). Pursuits;
10). Officer safety;
11). Officer discretion;
12). Traffic stops.
13). Department policies and procedures
14). Ethics (required biennially)
15). Mental Health (required annually)
16). Awareness Level HazMat Training
4. Training, certification and re-certification, if required, for commissioned and
non-commissioned personnel whose work assignment requires the use and access
to REJIS, MULES, NCIC, or other applicable law enforcement computer systems
and networks.
B. Mandated by change in status, rank or assignment:
1. Upon return from an extended leave of absence (military, sick, injured, etc.),
when new or revised rules, procedures, or legislation have been put in place
during the employee’s absence, as determined necessary by the employee’s
bureau/shift commander.
2. Upon promotion to the next higher rank and the duties and responsibilities of
the employee change significantly. Newly promoted supervisors will receive

-- 6 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 7 of 11
instruction on management and leadership skills, supervision, performance
evaluation, career counseling and support services available for the function
within one year of the promotion date. This includes any appropriate supervised
on-the-job training as determined by the employee’s commanding officer.
3. Upon re-assignment to another component requiring knowledge and skills not
yet developed or learned (i.e. Criminal Investigation Detective, Department
Armorer, Firearms Instructor, etc.) Including any requisite supervised on-the-job
training as determined by the appropriate commander, or where training is
mandated by law (i.e. Instructor, Field Training Instructor, Canine, etc.).
C. Shift Briefing Training
Shift briefing training will be utilized to introduce new legislation affecting law
enforcement, recent court decisions, new rules, regulations, or special orders, or topics of
general interest to law enforcement regarding safety, crime trends, or police issues. The
most appropriate media will be used to provide this training (printed matter, video, etc.).
D. Training
The Department provides continuing education to maintain the highest degree of
professionalism. The Department will comply with the Administrative Rules of the
Missouri Commission of Peace Officers Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.).
1. P.O.S.T. requires that all commissioned officers complete a minimum 24 hours
of continuing education annually, beginning with the first calendar year following
the date of certification. These hours must include training in the following core
areas:
a. Legal studies, minimum two (2) hours;
b. Interpersonal perspective studies, minimum two (2 hours;
c. Technical studies, minimum two (2) hours;
d. Skill development - Firearms, minimum two (2) hours;
e. Bias Based Policing Training - minimum one (1) hour (included in the
total 24 hours, not in addition to it); and
f. Electives - minimum 16 hours (any of the above core curricula areas)
2. P.O.S.T. approved training may be obtained from the following sources:
a. A minimum of eight (8) hours must be obtained from any P.O.S.T.
approved provider (i.e. Academy, FBI, IACP, MPCA);

-- 7 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 8 of 11
b. 16 hours may come from in-service training, provided materials are
properly filed and maintained by the Department;
X. REMEDIAL TRAINING:
A. In the event a shift commander, supervisor, or department training instructor
determines that an employee is needing remedial training as a result of the employee’s
lack of skill, knowledge or ability in job task performance, based on evaluation reports or
first-hand observation, or the employee has received disciplinary action and it is
recommended that the remedial training can improve future performance and can assist in
remedying the situation that contributed to the need for disciplinary action, that remedial
training provided shall be scheduled by the Deputy Chief at the first available training
course offered.
1. Notification of scheduled remedial training provided shall be in writing to the
employee.
2. All such remedial training provided shall be documented in the form of a
written memorandum or other Department authorized form or document and
forwarded to the Deputy Chief via the chain of command.
3. All remedial training provided records shall be placed in the employee’s
Department training file.
4. All scores and evaluations of such remedial training provided shall be
forwarded to the Deputy Chief.
5. Should an affected employee fail to participate or satisfactorily complete the
remedial training provided, he/she may be subject to disciplinary action, including
dismissal, as approved by the Chief of Police.
XI. CIVILIAN TRAINING:
A. Newly appointed civilian personnel will receive basic orientation and training
regarding:
1. The Agency’s role, purpose, goals, policies and procedures;
2. Working conditions and regulations; and
3. Responsibilities and rights of employees.
B. Civilian employees shall also receive initial and on-going training commensurate with
their job responsibilities and may include:

-- 8 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 9 of 11
1. On-the-job training and equipment familiarization;
2. Public relations skills;
3. Legal issues related to the release of reports and information;
4. REJIS training;
5. Mental Health issues (required annually); and
6. Ethics/Code of Conduct (required biennially).
C. Periodic in-service training should be scheduled for civilian employees to update
skills, review new procedures, legislation, Department policy and clerical operating
procedures. Resources used to meet these training needs may be acquired through
attendance at seminars offered by local colleges, universities, or private organizations;
computer training offered by the sources inside and outside of the Department and in-
house training directly related to the employee’s job function.
XII. MAINTENANCE OF TRAINING RECORDS:
A. By statute, it is the burden of each commissioned officer to obtain the required
P.O.S.T. continuing education and maintain a record of the training.
B. The Department will maintain a record of all provided training. All employees will
submit one copy of any training certificate to the Deputy Chief on the first day back from
the training, so that he/she can maintain a training database of each officer’s training.
That database will be updated as certificates of attendance/completion are received.
C. The Department will maintain records of each In-Service training class it conducts, to
include, at a minimum:
1. Course content (lesson plans);
2. Names of Agency attendees; and
3. Performance of individual attendees on tests, if administered.
XII. ACADEMY AND RECRUIT TRAINING:
The Department does not operate a police academy, however, has entered into an
agreement with the St. Louis County and Municipal Police Academy for both recruit and
continuing education training. Prior to, or at the start of recruit training, all recruits are
issued an orientation handbook.

-- 9 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 10 of 11
1. Prior to any assignment in which an officer may carry a weapon or is able to
make an arrest, the officer must successfully complete the basic recruit program at
a Missouri P.O.S.T. approved training facility. The curriculum of P.O.S.T.
approved training facilities is based on job tasks of the most frequent assignment
associated with duties of officers who complete the training. Program testing and
evaluation techniques are designed to measure competency in the areas of skill,
knowledge and abilities.
2. Prior to any new police officer being assigned to patrol duties, they will
complete training by Department instructors, in response to resistance or
aggression and demonstrate proficiency in the proper use of authorized
Department issued weapons.
XIII. FIELD TRAINING PROGRAM:
The Department assigns a Field Training Instructor to each newly hired Probationary
Police Officer to oversee the training of the new officer, and ensure the new officer
receives training on Agency policies, procedures, rules and regulations. The field
training instructor and/or shift supervisor may consult with academy staff in regard to
weakness or problem areas that the new officer may experience. Refer to the
Department’s Field Training Instructor Manual for additional information.
XIV. FAMILIARIZATION WITH THE ACCREDITATION PROCESS IS PROVIDED
TO DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES AS FOLLOWS:
A. To all newly hired agency personnel within 30 days after their employment begins or
within 30 days after completing the recruit academy; and
B. To all Department personnel during the self-assessment phase associated with
achieving initial accreditation.
XV. CAREER DEVELOPMENT:
The Department encourages its employees to take advantage of those courses offered by
P.O.S.T. certified providers to further their career development goals. The Department
will make every effort to accommodate an employee’s request to attend training that lies
within their area of interest to further their career objectives. The Deputy Chief shall
receive and provide training to supervisory personnel in the following areas associated
with career development:
1. Supervisors should include career development in the performance evaluation
process using training recommendations during counseling to enhance and
develop the employee’s skills.
2. Supervisors should be cognizant of training programs and opportunities that
will benefit the employee and the Department.

-- 10 of 11 --

OPD - 29.1
Page 11 of 11
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 8/26/2013
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 6/23/2020
Revised: 6/15/2021
Revised: 12/21/2021
Revised: 6/22/2022
Revised: 1/30/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 11 of 11 --

