OPD - 29.2
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Field Training Program
Filed Training Instructor (FTI)
________________________________________________________________________
FIELD TRAINING PROGRAM
I. PURPOSE
This Guideline establishes a Field Training Instructor (FTI) Program within the Olivette
Police Department. The Field Training Program will operate in accordance with the
following system to provide a valid post-academy training process and an evaluation of
the Probationary Officer’s performance and identifies the need for additional training.
II. POLICY
A. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to provide uniform training for newly
appointed Probationary Officers in the various facets of Department operations, policies,
rules, regulations and procedures. The Field Training Program is an indoctrination
process, which combines field training with objective evaluations to ensure that
Department standards are met.
B. The overall administration of the Field Training Program shall be the responsibility of
the Deputy Chief in conjunction with the Field Training Supervisor.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. Field Training – Field Training is a process by which an individual trainee receives
formal instruction on the job following his/ her basic academy training, as well as
introducing newly hired employees to the Olivette Police Department’s operations,
policies, rules, regulations, and procedures.
B. Field Training Instructor – Field Training Instructors (FTIs) are carefully selected
from the Patrol Division. These officers are formally instructed in the responsibilities
and duties of Field Training Instructors.
C. Alternate Field Training Instructor – The second of two training officers that is
assigned to a Probationary Officer.

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 29.2
Page 2 of 6
D. Field Training Supervisor – The Patrol Supervisor that manages and supervises the
Field Training Program.
E. Probationary Officer’s Instructional Guide – A document containing an extensive list
of Police Officer duties and procedures. It is used as a checklist and record of the field
training process but is not intended to limit the scope of the Field Training. The Guide
will be submitted to the Field Training Supervisor by the Primary Field Training
Instructor at the completion of the Field Training Program.
F. Probationary Officer- A newly appointed commissioned Police Officer who is trained
and evaluated during the first twelve (12) months of employment.
Probationary officers have no right of tenure with the Department and may be dismissed
by the Chief of Police if it is determined that continued employment is not in the best
interest of the Department. The employee has no right to appeal a decision to dismiss
during or at the end of the training and evaluation period.
G. Training Day- A training day is one in which the Probationary Officer is under the
direct supervision of a Field Training Instructor or training with the Bureau of
Investigations, Communications, or any other designated on-duty training. A training day
consists of a minimum of eight (8) working hours.
H. Training Week- Four (4) training days with daily evaluations.
IV. THE FIELD TRAINING INSTRUCTOR PROGRAM
A. Organization
The Field Training Program is under the guidance of the Field Training Supervisor. The
Deputy Chief will coordinate the placement of Probationary Officers on the Department
schedule. The Field Training Supervisor will be responsible for maintaining all records
relating to Probationary Officer development and training.
B. Design
1. The Field Training Program consists of four (4) distinct phases and lasts fifty-
two (52) weeks. The Alternate Field Training Instructor will train the
Probationary Officer at least three (3) weeks during the training period. It is
preferred that these three (3) weeks occur on the opposite shift of the Primary
Field Training Instructor, if the Department schedule allows. This training
instructor will also step in if the primary training instructor is absent for any
reason. If, at the conclusion of 52 weeks, it is determined by the Field Training
Supervisor that the Probationary Officer needs more training, the Field Training
Program can be extended. The purpose and content of each phase is described in
the Department’s Field Training Manual.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 29.2
Page 3 of 6
2. Daily observation reports begin on the first day of Phase One and continue
through week twelve (12). A DOR (Daily Observation Report) is completed by
the Field Training Instructor (Probationary Officer’s immediate Supervisor) and
forwarded to the Field Training Supervisor for review.
3. In addition to the DORs, which relates specifically to the FTI Program, the
Probationary Officer is formally evaluated after twelve (12) months of service in
accordance with the City’s and Department’s Personnel Policies.
4. The Probationary Officer will only be released from Phase Four after a
comprehensive review of monthly evaluations, work product, and a
recommendation by the Field Training Supervisor and approval by the Chief of
Police.
C. Responsibility of the Field Training Instructor
1. The Probationary Officer will have the same work schedule as his assigned
Field Training Instructor during phases 1, 2, and 3.
2. Field Training Instructors will ensure that the Probationary Officer is familiar
with the operation of the Department as outlined in the FTI Program Manual.
3. They must direct, guide, explain, and demonstrate the fundamentals of police
work until they are satisfied the Probationary Officer completely understands why
duties are performed in a certain manner.
4. They shall test the Probationary Officer by asking questions, presenting
scenarios and giving real-word examples.
5. They shall allow the Probationary Officer to perform such tasks as they feel
the Probationary Officer is competent and ready to assume.
6. Field Training Instructors are encouraged to discuss problems among
themselves or with supervisors. However, they shall not discuss a Probationary
Officer’s problems with other employees not directly involved in the FTI
Program. All such conversations will be held in private.
7. During the first three (3) phases, FTIs will observe and evaluate the
Probationary Officer’s performance.
a) Daily FTI Reports will be completed for each Training Day the
Probationary Officer and FTI are together.
b) After each tour of duty, the completed reports and activity logs will be
submitted to the Field Training Supervisor.

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 29.2
Page 4 of 6
c) The Probationary Officer Training Guide will be completed by the FTI
as topics are covered with the Probationary Officer. All topics shall be
covered with the Probationary Officers. All topics must be completed
prior to the end of Phase 3.
d) During the first three (3) phases, the Phase Summary Report will be
completed by the FTI and submitted to the Field Training Supervisor for
review.
8. If at any time during the Field Training Program, an FTI is of the opinion that
the Probationary Officer will not develop into a successful police officer because
of lack of interest, ability, poor conduct, or because of inefficiency or
incompetence, they shall document their observations on the appropriate report.
D. Responsibilities of the Field Training Supervisor:
The Field Training Supervisor (FTS) is the individual having the responsibility to ensure
the training and evaluation process is accomplished.
1. They will monitor and review all reports issued by the FTI and complete the
FTS Weekly Report.
2. They will review the Probationary Officers Training Guide to determine if it is
up to date and properly completed. If it is not current, they should ascertain why
and take appropriate corrective action.
3. They will closely monitor the work of the Probationary Officer during phase
four and complete necessary reports.
E. Selection of Field Training Instructors:
1. The position of Field Training Instructor is performed on a voluntary basis.
2. Minimum qualifications to be considered are:
a) Two (2) years’ experience as a full-time commissioned Police Officer.
b) Sustained overall performance ratings of Satisfactory or higher for the
candidates last review period.
c) Candidates will be nominated by the Field Training Supervisor and
approved by the Chief of Police.
F. FTI Training
Once selected, FTI’s will receive formal training at the earliest possible opportunity from

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 29.2
Page 5 of 6
a state certified law enforcement training facility. FTI’s will receive in-service training in
areas key to the development of Probationary Officers (i.e. search and seizure, legal
updates, interpersonal perspectives, etc.)
V. PROBATIONARY OFFICER REVIEW
A. The Field Training Supervisor shall conduct the Probationary Officer’s Review.
B. The review will be conducted at the end of the Field Training Phase Three (3) and the
Evaluation Phase (Phase 4).
C. The Field Training Supervisor shall review all evaluations and reports including
statistical data generated during the training and evaluation period. The Field Training
Supervisor shall conduct a personal interview with the Probationary Officer. The FTS
may also interview the FTIs and supervisors of the Probationary Officer.
D. At the conclusion of the evaluation by the FTS, a recommendation shall be made to
the Chief of Police as to the disposition of the Probationary Officer.
VI. FTI PROGRAM FOR PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE OFFICERS
A. Elements of the Field Training Program will be utilized in the orientation process for
personnel with previous law enforcement experience. Candidates may be eligible for a
modified Field Training Program which will be determined by the Field Training
Supervisor with the approval of the Deputy Chief and Chief of Police.
B. To be considered for a modified Field Training Program, previous experienced
Officers shall have a minimum of two (2) years as a full-time commissioned Police
Officer and be certified in the State of Missouri. Consideration will also be given, but not
limited to, the following information.
1. Size of previous agency;
2. Location of previous agency;
3. Type of law enforcement agency;
4. Duties or assignments worked; and
5. Amount of time since the Probationary Officer has worked.
C. The same reporting procedures will apply to previous experience Officers as to new
Probationary Officers.
1. The Officer will be expected to meet or exceed an average rating in all areas
pertaining to basic knowledge of patrol tactics, state and federal laws, general

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 29.2
Page 6 of 6
police practice and procedures.
2. At the end of Phase 1 (six weeks), a Phase Summary Report will be completed
by the FTI and reviewed by the FTS. At this time, they may recommend the
officer be certified to ride as a solo officer.
3. The Deputy Chief and Chief of Police will consider the recommendation and if
approved, the Officer will be assigned to Phase 4 for completion of the FTI
Program.
VII. FTI COMPENSATION
A. Any Field Training Instructor shall receive one (1) hour of compensatory time as FTI
compensation for each training day, of at least eight hours, when engaged in the
instructional training of a Probationary Officer.
B. Compensatory time as FTI compensation shall only be earned until the FTI reaches the
maximum compensatory accrual of 72 hours as permitted by City of Olivette policy. If
the maximum compensatory accrual is reached, no other forms of FTI compensation will
be earned. Compensatory time shall be submitted to the Deputy Chief by the conclusion
of the payroll period for which it was earned.
C. Field Training Officers shall have from the start of the training cycle until six weeks
upon conclusion of the training cycle to use all compensatory time earned as FTI
compensation during the training cycle. If the FTI fails to expend the compensatory time
prior to six weeks after the conclusion of the training cycle, the earned compensatory
time shall be scheduled by the Deputy Chief to be taken.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 9/15/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/10/2018
Revised: 8/15/2018
Revised: 7/10/2020
Revised: 10/2/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

