OPD 31.1
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Public Information Officer
Release of Information
PUBLIC INFORMATION
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish procedures for providing information
regarding the activities and performance of the Department to the public through the
facilities of print, broadcast and electronic media inquiries. It recognizes that the
responsibility for protecting the constitutional guarantees of both fair trial and free press
is shared equally by police and media.
II. PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICER:
A Public Information Officer will be appointed by the Chief of Police. The Public
Information Officer’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
1. Establish and maintain liaison with the news media representatives through
direct contact,
2. Prepare written news releases,
3. Inform media of photo opportunities that would be advantageous to the
Department,
4. Direct media to appropriate information sources for stories and assist news
personnel in covering news stories at the scenes of major incidents, to include
coordinating and authorizing the release of information about victims, witnesses
and suspects,
5. Serve as spokesperson when the scene/incident commander is not available,
6. Arrange for and assist at news conferences,
7. Assist with crisis situations within the Department,

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD 31.1
Page 2 of 4
8. Develop procedures for releasing information when other public service
agencies are involved in a mutual effort,
9. Involve the news media representatives in the development of changes and
procedure to the public information and news media policy,
10. Coordinate and obtain authorization for the release of information concerning
confidential Agency investigations and operations,
III. RELEASE OF INFORMATION:
A. The Department will respond to information requests from the news media, subject to
legal restraints and the necessity to preserve evidence, when the requested information
does not violate the constitutional rights of the accused or hinder investigations. The
withholding of information from the media because it might hinder the investigation will
be done only with the approval of the Chief of Police.
B. The scene supervisor shall ensure that the facts of the occurrence are transmitted from
the incident scene, through the chain of command, to the Chief of Police, when media
interest in the incident is expected. Once a news release has been approved, it will be
forwarded to media outlets and ECDC.
C. The shift commander shall ensure that notification is made to the next shift
commander in a timely manner when media interest is expected.
D. Types of information that can normally be released to the media include the following
routine crime news:
1. Daily Crime Summary
2. Basic information regarding an incident to which police have responded may
be provided to media representatives. Care must be taken not to release
information that could interfere with a successful criminal investigation. The
identities of victims, juvenile offenders, the names of sex crime victims, their
identifying characteristics and the names and exact addresses of crime witnesses,
as well as dollar amounts stolen, should not be released.
3. Department employees shall refer media inquiries to the Public Information
Officer, who will notify the Chief of Police.
E. At the request of the Chief of Police, the Public Information Officer will respond to
the scene of major incidents when extensive media coverage is anticipated. The Public
Information Officer will set up operations to keep informed about developments. News
briefings will be scheduled as the situation dictates.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD 31.1
Page 3 of 4
F. Information regarding Department policies, administrative activities or internal
investigations may be released to the news media only by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative.
G. With the approval of the Chief of Police, media interviews are permitted with
members of the Department concerning incidents, investigations they are assigned to, or
law enforcement topics about which they have direct knowledge.
1. If the Public Information Officer is not available, the appropriate personnel to
answer media questions at a crime/accident scene will be designated by the Chief
of Police.
2. A news conference format with one or more representatives may be utilized
when the Department has information it wishes to distribute to as many media
representatives as possible at the same time. Upon request, the Public
Information Officer will advise the media of the time, place and subject matter of
the news conference and prepare a written news release for distribution to
reporters who attend.
H. Arrest information may be given as follows:
1. Identification – After a warrant has been issued, adult suspects arrested for
criminal violations may be identified to the media by name, age, address and
occupation. The arrest record is open for thirty (30) days. If the person arrested
is not charged with an offense within this 30-day period, the arrest record
becomes a closed record.
2. Prisoner Status – When extensive media coverage is anticipated, the Chief of
Police is to be notified of the bond amount and when or if a warrant(s) is issued.
3. Evidence – So as not to prejudice future prosecution, avoid the release of
specific types of evidence that link an arrested suspect to a crime scene. Specifics
regarding crime scenes will never be released unless otherwise directed by the
Chief of Police.
4. Photographs – Arrested suspects may be photographed by the media while
being escorted by the police. Mugshots of arrested suspects or wanted persons
with prior convictions may be released to the media with permission of the Chief
of Police.
I. Crime scene security will always be maintained. Media access at crime scenes will be
strictly monitored so as not to interfere with any ongoing investigation. A designated
media assembly area should be established, and all media personnel should be addressed
at that location. Any further media access will be determined by the Chief of Police.

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD 31.1
Page 4 of 4
J. Civil Disturbances, Riots, Disasters, Major Fires
The Olivette Emergency Operations Plan deals at length with media policy at these
events. In summary, media access will be restricted if, in the judgment of the scene
commander or other competent authority, their access would unduly hamper or seriously
jeopardize the successful conclusion, or containment, of the event or situation.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/20/2018
Revised: 7/10/2020
Revised: 2/23/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

