OPD - 32.1
Page 1 of 14
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Police Report Preparation
Police Report Storage, Retrieval, and Internal Distribution
Warrant and Persons of Interest Records Management
Arrest Record Processing
Closed or Expunged Records
Release of Information
Record Checks
Record Room Function
Records Retention
Criminal Justice Information
Physical Media
Electronic Media
RECORDS SYSTEM
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to ensure the proper preparation, storage, retrieval,
and destruction of police information that is basic and essential to the police reporting
system. While a quality records system is the responsibility of all components of the
Department, the Bureau of Support Services manages the Records function.
II. DEFINITIONS
Record: A formal account of facts, events or proceedings recorded by mechanical or
electronic means for present or future reference.

-- 1 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 2 of 14
Closed Record: Available only to arrestee, law enforcement, and the employer for
childcare and nursing home employment of the arrestee.
Expunge: To completely remove, blot out, or obliterate an arrest record, rendering them
unreadable and or unavailable to anyone, including the arrestee.
Open Record: All arrest and incident reports are open to the public unless otherwise
closed by one of the provisions of RSMO 610 as defined in this section.
III. POLICE REPORT PREPARATION
A. Reporting Required
Every citizen complaint, criminal incident, or non-criminal incident, to which an officer
is dispatched, assigned, or encounters during self-initiated activities, will be documented
in a report or CAD notes. The comments and dispositions will indicate if reports,
citations, memorandums, or other documents are prepared.
Upon diligent completion of all assignments, the officer will assign one of the following
dispositions:
1. Report – an incident, accident or other offense has occurred without an arrest,
and a police report will be prepared.
2. Arrest – someone has been arrested for the offense and a report will be
prepared.
3. No Report Necessary (NRN) – An incident or accident has occurred which
required police service but does not require a police report.
4. Warning – A violation of ordinance has occurred, and a written or verbal
warning was issued to the violator. No police report will be prepared.
5. Summons – A violation of ordinance has occurred, and a citation has been
issued.
6 Gone on Arrival (GOA) – An incident, accident, or offense may have occurred,
but the assigned officer is unable to locate the reporter, victim, witness,
perpetrator, or evidence to substantiate further investigation. No police report is
prepared at this time.
7. Unfounded – No incident or offense occurred, and no police report will be
prepared.
8. Non-Valid Alarm – An alarm was activated accidentally or by system
malfunction and there is no burglary, robbery, or fire.

-- 2 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 3 of 14
9. Valid Alarm – The alarm was not activated accidentally or by a system
malfunction.
10. Memo – An incident has occurred which by an operational directive requires a
memorandum be prepared to document or advise administrators of the incident.
B. Specialized Reports
As specified elsewhere, certain incidents and offenses allow or require that a specialized
report form be used. These forms will be handwritten or typed and include, but are not
limited to, the following:
1. Accident Reports,
2. Alcohol Influence Report and related forms, and/or
3. Towed Auto form (DOR 4569).
C. Complaint Numbering
A sequential complaint number will be assigned to original incidents entered into the
Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system. The number will include a two-digit prefix
indicating the year.
1. The CAD system will automatically assign a complaint number (CN) when an
officer notifies the dispatcher that the assignment or self-initiated action requires a
complaint number.
2. Officers may also request complaint numbers for multiple offenses/incidents by
contacting the dispatcher.
3. Supplemental reports are assigned the original report number followed by the
sequential numerical value of the supplemental report.
D. Police Report Format
In general, officers will dictate or type original and supplemental police reports using the
St. Louis County Police Department’s CARE system. The CARE system will be used for
storage of all offense reports unless a specific report form is otherwise required.
1. The CARE clerk is accessed by telephone # 314-889-3604, or *2273 from a
cellular phone.
2. The officer will follow the directions of the CARE clerk and provide the known
information.

-- 3 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 4 of 14
3. The narrative should be concise but complete, providing all of the information
necessary for investigation, prosecution, or another follow-up activity.
4. Reports that are dictated to a CARE clerk will have a printed copy returned to
the reporting officer for review.
5. Upon review by the officer, should editing or changes be required, the officer
will ensure the appropriate changes are made.
6. After reviewing the completed police report, the officer will forward the report
with any attachments to his/her supervisor for review and approval.
7. When approved by the immediate supervisor, the report will be forwarded for
final approval.
8. Upon approval by a Patrol Commander, or Bureau of Investigations
Commander, the report will be submitted to the Records Technician for further
processing and filing.
E. Report Writing Techniques
Police reports are a record of an offense or incident and will be read by the public,
prosecutors, and courts. The quality of the report bears upon the professionalism of the
entire Police Department.
1. All fields should be completed with the available information.
2. Narratives should be concise but detailed.
3. All reports should be proofread for fact, grammar, and spelling.
4. All attachments should be securely attached to the report.
IV. RECORDS ROOM FUNCTION
A. The Olivette Police Department utilizes the St. Louis County Computer Assisted
Report Entry (CARE) records management system. This is a computer-based automated
records system that automatically cross references and indexes a myriad of information
including names, report numbers, types of incidents, locations, vehicles, etc. Included is a
master name index for adults, juveniles, victims, witnesses, suspects, etc.
B. The Department also uses the LETS (Law Enforcement Traffic System) program for
auto accidents, as well as Mobile Ticketing and IMDS (Intergraded Metropolitan
Docking System) computerized records management systems to track information

-- 4 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 5 of 14
relating to motor vehicle accidents, traffic enforcement, citation tracking & monitoring,
and municipal court cases.
C. The Records Room is the main repository for all hard copies of reports and associated
attachments (except for those related to juvenile reports). Processing and distribution of
police reports is the responsibility of the Records Technician. Any documents related to
these police reports such as subpoenas for records or insurance claims will be filed with
the original report.
D. Access to the Records area is controlled by a locked door and proximity card. Only
authorized personnel can enter this area. Access to Department records is controlled by
both physical and technological means. Such controls are designed to allow necessary
and reasonable access to Department records by those employees requiring and
authorized to receive such information, while at the same time, prohibiting access to
those who are not authorized.
E. Most report information is stored electronically and is accessible by all personnel as
needed. Typically, there is no need for Department personnel to access original copies of
any records. However, if needed, the Records Technician, Chief of Police, Deputy Chief,
Commander of the Bureau of Support Services, and the Commander of the Bureau of
Investigations may remove original processed reports for copying. When the original
report is returned, it will be placed in the “Records” mailbox or given directly to the
Records Technician. The Record Room Technician will return the original report to the
file.
F. If a copy of any police report is made, the Record Technician will log the
dissemination as to whom the report was given, and the date the copy was made.
“COPY” will be stamped on all pages of the copied report.
G. Authorized personnel that disseminate a police report when the Record Technician is
unavailable (i.e. after-hours or weekends) will notify him/her in a timely manner so the
dissemination can be logged.
H. The Records Technician will check the “Records” mailbox daily and will properly re-
file any reports in a timely manner.
I. On a regular basis, the Records Technician will provide the Deputy Chief with a list of
all reports that have not been received in the Record Room. Action is then taken to locate
and forward any missing reports to the Record Room for filing.
J. All record room files will be secured by the Records Technician or other designated
authority at the close of normal business hours.
K. Public window duties provided by the Records Technician may include:

-- 5 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 6 of 14
1. Referring inquiries to the proper Department, directing persons to locations
within the Department (i.e. Detective Bureau, shift commander, etc.),
2. Providing police reports to individuals requesting them following Department
guidelines,
3. Requesting the dispatcher to have an officer respond to the station for a report
or other field operations function, or
4. Providing any other assistance within the scope of Record Room expertise.
5. The main Department photocopy machine is in the hallway of the Police
Department, next to the Records Technician’s office. The machine is used by
designated clerical personnel and officers to copy reports, documents, or other
police related papers. The Records Technician is responsible for the supply of
paper, and for making notification of repair when needed. The Records
Technician normally copies reports for other Department components and
municipal, county, state, and federal agencies. Copies are also made of
documents for distribution to city and police administrators, and any documents
requested or required by Department policy and procedure.
V. RECORDS RETENTION:
The Department maintains all police reports, and various administrative records, in
accordance with the Missouri Sunshine Law, RSMo. 610 and the guidelines set forth by
the Missouri Secretary of State. Juvenile records will be maintained by the CARE system
unless ordered by the St. Louis County Juvenile Court to destroy, expunge, or seal at the
age of 18.
VI. MASTER NAME INDEX
A. All field reports and traffic citations stored in the CARE, LETS, and Mobile Ticketing
systems are indexed to facilitate search and retrieval. Search criteria and ranges are
established by the system provider and are based on legal requirements and needs.
Examples of search criteria may include but are not limited to names of persons involved
(suspect, victim, driver), type of offense, property involved (stolen, recovered, found),
and location of occurrence. These files are backed up daily and stored off-site at REJIS.
B. Records of calls for service are maintained in the CAD software system. Search
criteria and ranges are established by the software provider and are based on legal
requirements and needs. Calls for service may be searched by, but are not limited to, the
following criteria: names of persons involved (caller, victim, driver), type of offense, and
location of occurrence. These files are backed up daily and stored off-site at the East
Central Dispatch Center.

-- 6 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 7 of 14
VII. GENERAL
A. All police reports are stored in the CARE computer system. CARE can automatically
cross index information by complaint number, name, location, type of incident, and
property, based on the data entered into the system. CARE includes separate master name
indexes for all adults and juveniles, including victim, suspect, and witness involvements.
B. Incident reports involving juveniles are stored in the CARE database. The Bureau of
Investigations will maintain secure storage for any hard copy Juvenile report that may
need to be stored locally. The files are maintained in accordance with the Missouri
Sunshine Law, RSMo. 610 and the guidelines set forth by the Missouri Secretary of
State. Juvenile reports shall not be accessed electronically by any employee that is not
directly involved with the incident report.
C. A copy of every report certified as “Active,” is distributed to the Bureau of
Investigations for follow-up investigation.
D. The CARE system is used to prepare reports for submission to the Missouri Incident-
Based Reporting System.
E. Copies of auto accidents are transmitted to the Missouri State Highway Patrol through
the Law Enforcement Traffic System (LETS). Copies of Leaving the Scene cases are
assigned to the Bureau of Investigations for investigation.
F. The record system will be reviewed, at least annually, by the Chief of Police and
Bureau of Support Services, to ensure that the capabilities of the agency's records system
are both understood and used. This review will also identify problems and essential
modifications.
VIII. WARRANT AND PERSONS OF INTEREST RECORDS MANAGEMENT
A. The Persons of Interest (POI) records management includes investigative information
placed by officers of the Department.
B. Persons of Interest are placed on a suspect, based on probable cause, by the
investigating officer. The officer will complete a Persons of Interest/Contact/Advise
Entry Form #OPD – F1053 to include all known information necessary to enter the
Person of Interest into the REJIS, MULES, and/or NCIC computer systems. In addition
to documenting the reference number in the police report.
C. Warrants of the Olivette Municipal Court are entered into the REJIS computer
system. The warrant is filed in a binder located in the first floor cabinets above the fax

-- 7 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 8 of 14
machine, where it is accessible 24 hours a day. The warrant remains in the files as a form
of verification until the person named in the warrant is arrested or the warrant is
withdrawn or recalled by the Municipal Court.
1. Information on active Olivette Municipal Warrants can be accessed and cross-
indexed using the Regional Justice Information Services (REJIS), Municipal
Docketing System or Law Enforcement Master Name Index files.
2. The available information includes:
a. Date/Time warrant received,
b. Type of legal process: Criminal,
c. Nature of document,
d. Source of document: City of Olivette Municipal Court,
e. Name of Plaintiff or Defendant,
f. Officer assigned for service,
g. Date of assignment,
h. Court Docket Number from warrant, and
i. Date service due: open ended.
D. Cancellation of Warrants and Persons of Interest:
1. Upon arrest of the person named in the warrant:
a. Designated personnel will cancel the warrant from the REJIS, MULES
and NCIC computer system,
b. The canceled warrant is given to the arresting officer for attachment to
the arrest report, and
2. Upon receipt of notification that the warrant has been recalled or withdrawn by
the court, designated personnel shall remove the warrant from the file.
3. When the investigating officer determines that a person named as a Person of
Interest should no longer be considered such, he/she will notify designated
personnel to cancel the POI in the appropriate computer systems. A copy of the
cancellation will be attached to the report.

-- 8 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 9 of 14
E. Warrants or Persons of Interest from other agencies:
1. Copies of Warrants or Person of Interest received from other agencies will
generally be passed through the Bureau of Field Operations for arrest attempts in
accordance with the procedures for executing warrants.
2. Warrants or Persons of Interest wanted by other departments must be verified
before the arrest is affected.
IX. ARREST RECORD PROCESSING AND STORAGE
A. All instances of arrest require that a police report is written, and the arrestee is
fingerprinted, and photographed in accordance with Department booking procedures.
The arrest is immediately entered in REJIS at which time an AR (Arrest) number is
assigned to the arrestee. This AR number is entered onto the booking sheet and
referenced in the reports.
B. Arrests are entered into the Regional Justice Information System (REJIS) by the
booking officer.
1. The REJIS system assigns an original Tracking Number to each arrest.
2. The REJIS system assigns a History Number to the arrestee, and all arrests of
that individual are indexed to that History Number.
C. The Records Technician maintains Local Identification Number (LID) files.
1. Photo files include printed arrest photos (mug shots) and digital arrest photos,
which are maintained in the St. Louis County IRIS mug shot system.
2. Fingerprint files include inked impressions maintained with the booking
sheets. Livescan digitally transmits captured criminal fingerprints and all relative
criminal history information to the Missouri State Highway Patrol, Criminal
Records Division. Inked fingerprints, including all relative criminal history
information, and Livescan fingerprints with a court disposition are mailed to the
same division.
X. PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING AND STORING CLOSED OR EXPUNGED
RECORDS
A. RSMo. 610, the “Sunshine Law,” establishes practices for the closure, dissemination,
and expungement of police reports.

-- 9 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 10 of 14
B. All correspondence referring to court ordered closing or expungement of records shall
be directed to the Chief of police.
C. Once the legitimacy of the correspondence has been determined, and with the approval
of the Chief of Police, the Records Technician shall take the appropriate action to comply
with the court order. This shall include making all appropriate modifications to computer
entries and marking documents held by this Department as a “Closed Record.”
D. Any requests or orders to close a record will be filed with the original report. Should
the report be on micro-film:
1. The closure will be noted on the cassette, and
2. The closure request or court order will be filed in the appropriate secure
cabinet.
E. Expunged Records
1. Upon the receipt of an authorized court order to expunge reports, records, and
files, the Records Technician will obliterate all identification of the arrestee in all
related documents. The Records Technician will obliterate all photos and LID
files, including fingerprint cards. All identification of the arrestee will be
removed from any related in-house computer records including the master name
index.
a. Designated personnel will delete the expunged information from REJIS
files, following the format prescribed by REJIS.
b. Copies of the court order for expungement will be forwarded to the
Central Records Section of the St. Louis County Police Department and to
the Missouri State Highway Patrol and F.B.I as applicable.
c. The court order, and proofs that the court order has been carried out,
will be filed in a secure file in the Record Room.
2. Expunging a record includes:
a. Replacing the individual’s name throughout the entire report or record
(including attachments) with the word “Expunged.”
b. Redacting all personal descriptive information (e.g. SSN, DOB,
address, phone number) from the entire report or record.
c. Destroying/deleting all mug shots.

-- 10 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 11 of 14
d. Destroying/deleting all copies of the fingerprint cards.
e. Removing the booking sheet from the file and notifying REJIS to delete
the related entry in the subject’s criminal history.
f. Deleting the in-house REJIS computer entry.
3. Upon completion of the expungement process, no record will exist to show the
individual identified in the expungement order possessed a criminal record
through this Department.
XI. RELEASE OF INFORMATION OUTSIDE OF THE DEPARTMENT
A. Policy
All information, records, and reports that the Department has control over are
confidential and shall not be released outside of the Department unless authorized. This
includes all computerized information from the REJIS and in-house computer systems.
All employees with access to criminal justice records through REJIS, MULES, and NCIC
are required to comply with the policies concerning the entry, modification, retrieval and
release of these records. The Department will investigate all suspected instances of
misuse, and confirmed misuse may result in disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment. The release of certain records may violate state and/or
federal laws or regulations which may result in civil and criminal penalties. Open public
records may be released only in accordance with Department procedures.
B. Only information regarding Olivette incidents or arrests may be released.
C. When releasing reports, the name of the person and/or agency to which the report is
released will be recorded in the log.
D. Release of Reports
Three types of reports are defined under the statute: incident, arrest, and investigative. A
police report may include one or more of these and each type of report must be reviewed
and considered separately to determine if the information is open or closed.
1. Incident Report
Details the date, time, specific location, name of victim, and the immediate facts
and circumstances surrounding the initial report of a crime or incident. These
include logs, crime reports, accident reports, and complaints.
2. Arrest Report

-- 11 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 12 of 14
Names the person arrested and the charges.
3. Investigative Report
A record, other than an arrest or incident report, inquiring into a crime or
suspected crime. The investigative report is a closed record until the investigation
becomes inactive.
E. Information on the identity of persons named in the reports will not be released if:
1. The victim is the victim of a sex crime,
2. Release of identity would endanger the safety of victims, witnesses, undercover
officers, informants, or other persons named in the incident,
3. Release of the information would jeopardize an active investigation,
4. Release of the suspect’s name would hinder the location or arrest of the
suspect, and/or
5. Information would disclose investigative techniques, procedures, or guidelines.
F. Response to inquiries about persons in our custody:
1. Bond amounts and bonding procedures can be released,
2. If a suspect is being held without warrant, refer the inquiry to the case detective
or shift commander, and
3. For inquiries about charges from other departments, refer the inquiry to the
other department.
G. Response to civilian inquiries about persons wanted by our Department:
1. Municipal Warrants
No information will be given to persons other than the suspect.
2. Persons of Interest
Refer the inquiry to the officer/detective handling the case or to the shift
commander.
XII. RECORD CHECK REQUESTS BY CORRESPONDENCE AND TELEPHONE

-- 12 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 13 of 14
A. Requests by Correspondence:
1. For members of authorized agencies to receive record information by
correspondence the request must be an official form or on office stationery which
clearly designates the office address and is signed by someone with an official
capacity in that office.
2. Requests by mail shall be forwarded to the Records Technician who shall, at
their earliest convenience, make a cursory check of the request and arrange them
for processing. Processing involves retrieving the report, checking it for
restrictions to release, copying the report, determining the cost, if any, and
mailing the requestor via normal mailing procedures. Either the Records
Technician or other person designated by the Chief of police may complete the
process.
B. Requests by Telephone:
1. For any member of authorized agencies to receive information by telephone, a
call back will be required. The Department member will obtain the officer or
agent's name (and DSN where applicable), the agency or department and
telephone number and return the call. In cases where the caller is not personally
known to you, verify the telephone number of the agency as listed in the
telephone directory.
2. If there is any question as to the legitimacy of the agency making the request,
the Department is under no obligation to telephonically provide arrest record
information.
XIII. STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE INFORMATION
A. Physical Media
1. Criminal justice information that is to be destroyed must be placed in a shred
bin located within the Police Department.
2. Bins shall remain under the control of the Deputy Chief until the contents are
destroyed.
3. Outside commercial shredding contractors shall not be permitted control of
intact criminal justice documents without the supervision of a designated Police
Department employee.
4. The disposal or destruction of physical media will be witnessed and
documented.
B. Electronic Media

-- 13 of 14 --

OPD - 32.1
Page 14 of 14
1. Criminal justice information stored on electronic media (i.e. hard drive, thumb
drive, etc.) will be sanitized or destroyed as needed.
2. The Deputy Chief will be responsible for the sanitization, removal, storage and
destruction of all electronic media.
3. Electronic media that is to be sanitized or destroyed shall remain under the
control of the Deputy Chief.
4. The sanitization and/or destruction of electronic media will be witnessed and
documented.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 11/03/2009
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 10/30/2013
Revised: 4/7/2014
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/20/2018
Revised: 6/18/2018
Revised: 5/19/2020
Revised: 6/22/2022
Revised: 3/1/2024
Revised: 9/6/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 14 of 14 --

