OPD – 32.2
Page 1 of 10
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Missing Child
Missing Person
Runaways
St. Louis Area Regional AMBER Alert (S.A.R.A.A)
Missouri AMBER Alert
Endangered Person Advisory
Lost or Disoriented Persons
Unidentified Persons
Located Missing Persons
MISSING PERSONS AND RUNAWAYS
I. PURPOSE:
A. It is the purpose of this General Order to establish a procedure for the reporting and
investigation of missing persons, missing children, child abductions, unidentified
individuals, and runaway juveniles.
B. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to thoroughly investigate reports of
all missing persons, unidentified persons and runaways. In addition, this Department
holds that every child that is reported as missing will be considered “at-risk” until
significant information to the contrary is confirmed.
II. REPORTS:
A. A CARE report shall be prepared immediately, a complaint number assigned, and all
information forwarded to ECDC to be entered into REJIS, NCIC, and MULES and the
appropriate investigative action initiated. If a photograph of the missing person is
available, it will be disseminated to all supervisors. The missing person information will
be disseminated to patrol officers at shift change.

-- 1 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 2 of 10
1. Adult – A person at least 18 years of age is reported missing and his/her
absence cannot be explained. The reporting party must have specific knowledge
of the missing person (i.e. spouse, parent, employee) before they can make the
report. Any suspicious circumstances regarding the missing person should be
noted in the narrative portion of the report (i.e. physical/mental disability).
Responding officers should request a recent photograph of the missing person and
as much information about the missing person should be obtained, to include:
a. Legal name;
b. Date of Birth/Age;
c. Physical Description;
d. Last known clothing description;
e. Where the person was last visibly seen and by whom;
f. Pre-existing medical condition(s).
2. Department form #OPD - F1136, “Missing Person Affidavit”, shall be
completed.
3. Juvenile Runaway – Responding officers shall identify previous patterns and
obtain a recent photograph of the runaway when available. The complaint
number, name and address will be recorded on the reverse side of the photograph
and the photograph will be kept on file with the Bureau of Investigations.
B. A supervisor will approve the report and the missing person information will remain in
the computer until that person is located. The Shift Commander shall be notified
whenever a missing person/runaway report is filed in order to coordinate action with the
next shift. The responding officer or other designated officer will ensure that follow-up
contact is made with the reporting party within 24 hours to determine if the subject
returned or was located. The Shift Commander will ensure that a supplemental report is
filed reflecting the outcome of the follow-up.
C. If the missing subject has not been located within 24 hours of the initial report, the
follow-up investigation shall be the responsibility of the Bureau of Investigations.
D. Missouri State Compliance: Entries into NCIC are automatically forwarded to the
Missouri State Highway Patrol.

-- 2 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 3 of 10
III. SEARCHES AND RADIO BROADCAST
A. Searches of missing persons will be conducted, if warranted (i.e. disoriented person,
lost child, etc.)
B. There will be circumstances when radio broadcast of a missing person, in addition to a
report being filed, may be necessary. Those circumstances include, but are not limited to:
a. Foul play suspected;
b. Physical or mental disability;
c. Suicidal thoughts;
d. Elderly person.
IV. MISSING CHILD:
A. A “missing child or juvenile” is defined as a person who is under the age of eighteen
years. This also includes homeless youths, emancipated minors, unaccompanied minors,
and any person in foster care regardless of age. An unaccompanied minor includes a
homeless child or youth not in the physical custody of a parent or guardian.
B. An “at-risk missing child” is defined as a child who is:
1. 13 years of age or younger; or believed or determined to be experiencing one
or more of the following:
2. Out of the zone of safety for his or her age or developmental stage,
3. Mental or behavioral disabilities,
4. Drug dependent, including prescribed medication and/or illegal substances,
and the dependency is potentially life-threatening,
5. Has been absent from home for more than 24 hours before being reported to
law enforcement as missing,
6. In a life-threatening situation,
7. In the company of others who could endanger his/her welfare,
8. Absent under circumstances inconsistent with established patterns of behavior,
9. Involved in a situation causing a reasonable person to conclude the child should
be considered at risk.

-- 3 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 4 of 10
C. Dispatchers who receive a report of a missing child shall:
1. Gather sufficient information from the caller in order to determine the nature of
the missing child, the level of risk involved, and a preliminary description of the
child;
2. Immediately dispatch an officer to the location;
3. Notify the on-duty supervisor;
4. Promptly broadcast a description of the child as well as any other pertinent
information to all Olivette Police Department units and surrounding agencies; and
5. Query the CAD system for related information on the address, the child, the
family, or other reported incidents in the area where the child is missing.
D. The responding officer shall gather essential information from the reporting party
including, but not limited to:
a. Legal name;
b. Date of Birth/Age;
c. Physical Description;
d. Last known clothing description;
e. Where the person was last visibly seen and by whom;
f. Pre-existing medical condition(s).
E. The responding officer will conduct a proper investigation and thorough search of the
location from which the missing child has been reported. If the child is not located and
determined to be an “at-risk missing child,” the officer shall:
1. Immediately notify the Shift Commander, who will respond to the scene.
2. Enter the information of the missing child into NCIC. The National Child
Search Assistance Act (NCSAA, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5779 and 5780) mandates law
enforcement’s immediate response to reports of missing children, no
establishment or observance of a waiting period before accepting a case,
immediate entry of descriptive information about the missing child into the NCIC

-- 4 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 5 of 10
Missing Person File, and close liaison with the National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children (NCMEC) in actual missing-child cases.
3. The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act (Adam Walsh Act, Pub. L.
No. 109-248) mandates NCIC entry must be made by law enforcement within two
hours of receipt of a report of a missing or abducted child. Current CJIS guidance
regarding this time limit is two hours from the moment the minimum amount of
information for NCIC entry has been obtained.
4. Request a recent photograph of the child.
5. Missouri Senate Bill 186 requires that the law enforcement agency submit a
recent photograph of the child, the child’s identifying information, and the last
known contact with the child to the National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children (NCMEC).
6. Department form #OPD - F1136, “Missing Person Affidavit”, shall be
completed.
F. The Shift Commander shall assess the situation. An immediate search will take place
utilizing all available personnel and necessary outside resources. A K-9 unit may be
requested from a surrounding agency to track missing persons, especially young toddlers
who wander away. The shift commander shall then establish a command post, arrange
logistics for search efforts and notify the Bureau of Investigations, the Deputy Chief and
the Chief of Police of the situation. In a case of child abduction, the Shift Commander
shall initiate the S.A.R.A.A. plan. The Bureau of Investigations will be notified
immediately. The Bureau of Investigations shall coordinate communication with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children and assume responsibility for the
investigation.
G. Further assessment of the situation will be coordinated out of the Command Post, to
include media inquiries, use of volunteers and hotline operation.
V. ST. LOUIS AREA REGIONAL AMBER ALERT (S.A.R.A.A.):
A. The S.A.R.A.A. plan is a cooperative effort between law enforcement agencies and
the radio and television media. The plan calls for the broadcast media to aid the police in
the search of a kidnapped child and the suspect by interrupting regular programming to
announce specific details of a confirmed child kidnapping. The plan utilizes the
Emergency Alert System.
1. In order to activate the S.A.R.A.A. plan, the Shift Commander must verify all
four specific criteria prior to sending out the request. The criteria are:

-- 5 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 6 of 10
a. The child is 16 years of age or younger and the Shift Commander or
investigating detective believes the child has been kidnapped as defined by
Missouri Statute 565.110.
b. The Shift Commander or Bureau Commander believes the child is in
danger of serious bodily harm or death.
c. An investigation has taken place that verifies the kidnapping or
eliminated alternative explanations.
d. Sufficient information exists to disseminate to the public that could
assist in locating the kidnapped child, alleged suspect or the suspect’s
vehicle.
If all the above criteria are not met, do not request a S.A.R.A.A. broadcast.
2. The following are examples when the S.A.R.A.A. would be met:
a. A child is kidnapped off the street.
b. A child is kidnapped from his/her home.
c. A kidnapping occurred where the child is taken by an unknown adult
without parental consent/knowledge.
d. A vehicle is stolen or car jacked and a child was left inside the vehicle.
e. A child was reported missing, there is evidence of foul play, and police
believe the child was kidnapped.
3. The following situations do not meet the S.A.R.A.A. criteria:
a. Missing children believed to have run away from home.
b. Missing children involved in child custody disputes unless a possibility
of harm to the child has been determined (parental kidnapping).
c. Missing persons 17 years of age or older.
d. Police searches for criminals (murder suspects, bank robbers, etc).
4. Once the Shift Commander has determined the criteria is sufficient for
activation of this plan, that individual will complete the S.A.R.A.A. Notification
Fax Cover Sheet and Form, #’s OPD – F1077 and OPD – F1078, respectively.
5. Upon completion of the forms the Shift Commander will:

-- 6 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 7 of 10
a. Call the KMOX news editor at 314-444-3234, or if no answer, 314-444-
3256, to notify KMOX that a S.A.R.A.A. Notification Form is being faxed
to 314-588-1234. (Note: Care should be taken to provide verified,
pertinent information as it applies to the given situation. Proper judgment
should be taken in order to ensure that information is not needlessly
distributed that will impact future prosecution or unnecessarily impact
innocent parties.)
b. Upon acceptance of the notification form, KMOX will ensure that all
criteria are met and interrupt programming to transmit the S.A.R.A.A.
Message. KMOX will act as the media liaison for all other media outlets.
c. Once the child is located, or the case is otherwise closed, the Shift
Commander will be notified and will cancel the S.A.R.A.A. by calling
KMOX and faxing another form verifying the cancellation and providing
recovery or closure.
VI. MISSOURI AMBER ALERT
A. Missouri AMBER Alert does not replace or compete with local abduction alert plans
(S.A.R.A.A.). Missouri AMBER Alert has been designed to complement and enhance
local plans by providing additional methods of notification and statewide coverage.
Missouri AMBER Alert has also been designed to provide a local alert capability in areas
where one does not exist, although the development of local plans is preferred.
B. Procedure
1. In order to activate a Missouri AMBER Alert, the Shift Commander must
verify all five specific criteria prior to sending out the request. The criteria are:
a. The Department has reasonable belief that an abduction has occurred
which meets the definition in RSMo. 565.110 or 565.115;
b. The Department believes that the child is in imminent danger of serious
bodily injury or death;
c. Enough descriptive information exists about the victim and/or abductor
for law enforcement to issue a Missouri AMBER Alert;
d. The victim of the abduction is a child age 17 years or younger;
e. The child’s name and other critical data elements – including the child
abduction (CA) flag – have been entered in NCIC;

-- 7 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 8 of 10
f. Parental disputes do not apply unless a possibility of harm to the child
has been determined.
2. If all the criteria are met, the Shift Commander should complete the Missouri
AMBER Alert Abduction Form. The form should be faxed to the Missouri State
Highway Patrol, Troop F at (573) 751-6814. The direct telephone number is
(573) 751-1000.
3. When updates to or a cancellation of the Missouri AMBER Alert is necessary,
a new form should be completed and faxed with the appropriate action to be
taken.
VII. ENDANGERED PERSON ADVISORY
A. The Endangered Person Advisory is a voluntary partnership between law enforcement
and local broadcasters to rapidly disseminate information about a missing and
endangered person to law enforcement agencies, broadcasters, and the public.
B. The Endangered Person Advisory is initiated solely by Missouri law enforcement
agencies using the following criteria:
1. Do the circumstances fail to meet the criteria for a Missouri AMBER Alert? (If
they do meet the criteria, immediately follow the protocol to issue a Missouri
AMBER Alert)
2. Is the person missing unexplained, involuntary, or suspicious circumstances?
3. Is the person believed to be in danger because of age, health, mental or physical
disability, environment or weather conditions, in the company of a potentially
dangerous person or some other factor that may put the person in peril?
4. Is there information that could assist the public in the safe recovery of the
missing person?
C. Procedure
1. If all the criteria are met, the shift commander should complete the Endangered
Person Advisory Forms. The form should be faxed, along with attachments such
as photographs, area maps, etc. to the Missouri State Highway Patrol, Troop F at
(573) 751-6814.
2. Contact the Missouri State Highway Patrol; Troop F Headquarters at 573-751-
1000 to verify that the faxed forms and attachment have be received.

-- 8 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 9 of 10
3. When updates to or a cancellation of the Endangered Person Advisory is
necessary, a new form should be completed and faxed with the appropriate action
to be taken.
VIII. LOST OR DISORIENTED PERSONS:
Upon receiving an assignment for a lost or disoriented person that will require a physical
search of the area, the responding officer shall verify the report and notify the Shift
Commander. The Shift Commander shall evaluate the circumstances and request
assistance, if necessary. Should the magnitude of the search require additional personnel,
the Deputy Chief shall be notified through the chain of command and assume
responsibility for coordinating the search.
IX. FOLLOW-UP INVESTIGATION:
A. Missing person and runaway reports will be forwarded to the Bureau of Investigations
for follow-up investigation.
B. Contact with the reporting party should be made at least on a weekly basis to ensure
the person is still missing. On many occasions the reported missing persons are located
and return home, and the reporting party neglects to notify the Department so that the
information can be canceled out of the computer.
X. LOCATED MISSING PERSONS:
A. Adults – If this Department made the original report, the locating officer shall prepare
a supplemental report. If the adult does not appear to need assistance, the adult will be
allowed to proceed without further action. The locating officer is responsible for
cancellation of the teletype entry. The locating officer shall contact the reporting party
and inform him/her that the missing person was located and allowed to proceed (if
applicable). If the original report was made by another agency, the locating officer shall
prepare a miscellaneous incident report and send a locate teletype to the original
reporting agency. The teletype should only indicate that the adult was located and that no
further action was taken (if applicable). The locating officer need not contact the
reporting party.
B. Juveniles – If this Department made the original report, the locating officer shall
prepare a supplemental report. The locating officer is responsible for cancellation of the
runaway teletype entry. If Department personnel locate runaway juveniles, the juvenile is
either returned to his/her residence or appropriate agency (Youth Emergency Services, St.
Louis County Juvenile Detention or where the Missouri Children’s Division deems
appropriate.) If the original report was made by another agency the locating officer shall
prepare a miscellaneous incident report and send a locate teletype to the original
reporting agency. A missing child’s information shall not be removed from any database
or system until the child is found or the case is closed.

-- 9 of 10 --

OPD – 32.2
Page 10 of 10
XI. UNIDENTIFIED PERSONS
Unidentified persons include persons, either living or deceased, whose identity cannot be
ascertained or who are unable to communicate their identity. This definition also includes
dismembered body parts. Examples include catastrophe victims, unidentified bodies,
persons who are unconscious, persons who have memory loss, or very young children.
Unidentified persons do not include those persons who refuse to disclose their identity.
1. Upon receipt of an unidentified person complaint, officers shall complete and file
an Incident Report.
2. The responding officer will gather all available information about the subject and
will attempt to establish the subject's identity.
3. If the subject is living, the responding officer should coordinate the receipt of
available community support services for the person, as needed and available. These
services may include food, shelter and medical attention.
4. The Bureau of Investigations is responsible for the follow-up investigation of all
cases involving unidentified persons.
5. The NCIC Unidentified Person file assists officers in dealing with unidentified
persons complaints. This file provides a national database for the entry and query of
unidentified living persons, unidentified deceased persons, and/or unidentified body
parts.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/13/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 4/20/2018
Revised: 8/21/2018
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 2/23/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 1/21/2025
Revised: 2/11/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 10 of 10 --

