OPD – 33.1
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Crime Scene Processor
Collecting of Evidence
Crime Scene Equipment
Packaging of Evidence
Marking or Labeling of Physical Evidence
Evidence Receipt Form
Fingerprints
Crime Scene Investigation Reporting
EVIDENCE COLLECTION AND PRESERVATION OPERATIONS
I. PURPOSE:
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines and procedures for the
collection and preservation of evidence by Department officers, and to establish a system
for the administrative processing and storing of evidence recovered from a crime scene.
B. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department that all officers assigned to process
the scene of a crime will protect, collect, and preserve all physical evidence that may lead
to the apprehension of the perpetrator, and will ensure that all evidence that is collected
will be processed or preserved for later analysis.
II. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE SCENE PROCESSOR:
A. As soon as a crime scene has been secured, the needs of the victims have been
satisfied, and the safety of those present is assured, the officer will begin processing the
scene. Officers will have access to crime scene processing equipment and supplies.
Equipment and supplies include but are not limited to, additional personnel, portable
fingerprint kit, digital camera, crime scene tape, evidence packaging supplies, notepads,
tape measure, etc.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 2 of 7
B. If the crime committed is of a serious nature and/or the crime scene is complex, the
Chief of Police or Deputy Chief may request the assistance of a St. Louis County Police
Department Crime Scene Unit to process the scene.
C. The responsibilities of the processing officer include but are not limited to:
1. Securing and protecting the crime scene,
2. Documenting all entries into the scene,
3. Photographing,
4. Diagramming,
5. Sketching,
6. Protecting, collecting, and preserving evidence,
7. Recovery of latent fingerprints, and
8. Accident investigation.
D. To prevent the destruction or the contamination of evidence, the assigned officer will
initiate security measures to prevent unauthorized persons from entering the crime scene
or the immediate area.
1. The security measures shall include:
a. Do not touch, move, or pick up objects; and
b. Do not disturb any article, mark or impression that may have been made
by the criminal.
2. The assigned officer must also prevent others from altering or contaminating
the area. The assigned officer must maintain this rigid security until all
measurements have been made, the scene has been sketched, videotaped or
photographed, the area has been thoroughly searched for fingerprints, tool marks,
and the like, and all evidence has been collected.
III. COLLECTING OF EVIDENCE:
A. Collection methods used should preserve the condition of the evidence in the process
of collection, prevent the introduction of foreign materials to it, and ensure as complete a
sample as possible and practical.

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 3 of 7
B. When collecting evidence, the officer must look for those things that may be out of
place or do not appear to “belong,” regardless of their size or appearance. Do not disturb
positions recorded on the crime scene sketch, until the scene has been fully photographed
and processed for latent prints.
C. After completing the above preliminary tasks, the officer will carefully collect the
evidence so that it is not damaged, altered or destroyed. Officers will wear gloves (i.e.
Nitrile, latex, etc.) prior to touching any item or surface within a crime scene.
D. There will be occasions when evidence such as liquids, stains, paint scrapings, fibers
and soil will be submitted for laboratory (scientific) examination. In these instances, a
generous sampling of the material must be collected when possible.
E. Physical traces that may be used for comparison purposes, at a later date should be
collected in major investigations of a serious crime against a person or property, etc.
Typical items include hair found in fingernail scrapings or the clothing of the victim,
fibers, insulation from a safe, soil from a crime or accident scene, tool marks, broken
glass from headlight lenses, paint scrapings or chips found on the body of a traffic
accident victim.
F. Gunshot residue tests may be administered in homicide cases, crimes where a gun was
discharged, or at the discretion of the Bureau of Investigation supervisor.
G. When collecting DNA evidence, officers need to be aware that DNA evidence is more
sensitive than other types of evidence. Officers should be especially aware of their
actions at the scene to prevent inadvertent contamination of DNA evidence.
H. If collected evidence is transferred to another person or agency prior to being logged
into the PMI Evidence Tracker System, documenting the transfer is critical to
maintaining the chain of custody. The record of transfer of evidence should include the
date, time, name of person receiving the evidence, reason for transfer, and a synopsis of
the incident. The record of transfer information will be documented in the incident report.
IV. PROPER PACKAGING OF EVIDENCE:
A. Clothing collected at a crime scene that is wet or bloody will be placed in a paper bag.
The officer seizing the clothing will transport the clothing to the Police Department and
place the clothing in the Blood Dry Closet. Once dry, the Evidence Custodian will
remove clothing and properly repackage the clothing. Packaged clothing with dried blood
will be marked with bio-hazard warnings.
B. The officer will place each piece of evidence in separate containers. Pill boxes,
envelopes, test tubes, jars, bottles, and cartons containing evidence will be sealed in such
a manner that they cannot be opened without breaking the seal. Once a seal has been
affixed to a container, the officer will place his/her initials across it. Only items such as
similar types of drugs, currency, jewelry, etc., can be placed in the same evidence bags

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 4 of 7
and tagged under the same evidence tag. Unlike evidence must be placed in separate
evidence bags and tagged separately (i.e. jewelry, money, guns, and drugs).
V. MARKING OR LABELING OF EVIDENCE:
A. When marking an item for future identification, the mark shall be:
1. Made as soon as possible by the officer receiving the item,
2. Made as small as possible,
3. Made distinctive and not easily duplicated, and
4. In places as to prevent alteration, contamination or destruction of evidence
value or reduction of its market or intrinsic value.
B. An appropriate marking on an item or evidence for future identification shall include
the officer’s initials and DSN.
C. An item of evidence does not need to be specially marked for future identification
when:
1. It bears a permanently inscribed serial number, and/or
2. Marking would alter it as to change its evidential value.
VI. PROCEDURES FOR EVIDENCE RECEIPT FORM:
A. Any member of the Department who has evidence that needs to be processed by the
St. Louis County Police Crime Laboratory shall first inventory the evidence by noting it
on the St. Louis County Police Department Evidence Receipt. Items taken to the
laboratory may include but are not limited to: blood, blood stained objects, other
physiological stains and tissue, biological materials, large and bulky items, firearms,
drugs, and other items. All items taken to the laboratory should be prepared in a uniform
manner that is consistent with the requirements of the St. Louis County Police
Department Crime Laboratory. The Evidence Receipt Form will accompany the item and
be properly completed with all available information.
B. Give as much information about the evidence as possible. The description should
include:
1. Make,
2. Model and Model Number, if known,
3. Serial Number,

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 5 of 7
4. Color(s), and
5. Unique characteristics, markings, etc.
C. The officer transferring the evidence will complete the Chain of Custody Section. The
officer transferring the evidence will then sign the form in “From” field. The officer or
evidence technician receiving the evidence will sign the form in the “To” field. Each
subsequent transfer of the evidence will be documented in the same “From/To” fashion.
The documentation of transfer shall include:
1. The date,
2. His/her name, and
3. The reason that the evidence is out (i.e. transported to County Lab).
D. The evidence will then be sealed in an Olivette Police Department Evidence envelope
with evidence tape and the Evidence Receipt attached. Officers will place their initials
and DSN on the seal.
E. Evidence will be placed in a temporary holding locker. A copy of the Evidence
Receipt is to be attached to the police report after completion.
F. The Evidence Custodian will not accept evidence without a properly completed
Evidence Receipt Form. In cases where the form is not completed properly, the evidence
will be left in the intermediate locker and notice will be given to the appropriate
Commander from the Evidence Custodian indicating the deficiency. As soon as the
seizing officer corrects the evidence receipt, the evidence will be processed by the
Evidence Custodian.
G. The 3 ½” x 5” evidence tags will be used only for large items that will not fit into
evidence bags or envelopes.
H. Evidence from felony cases require a St. Louis County Police Department Evidence
Receipt regardless if the evidence will not be processed by the St. Louis County Police
Crime Laboratory.
I. Perishable evidence (i.e. blood) that will need to be tested/examined will initially be
stored in a lockable evidence refrigerator in the evidence packaging area. Once this is
completed, the officer shall notify the Detective Bureau that the evidence was secured;
the Detective Bureau will schedule a drop off appointment for the lab. Perishable
evidence will be transferred to the Missouri State Highway Patrol Crime Laboratory or
other approved facility by the Detective Bureau.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 6 of 7
J. When laboratory results are returned, a supplemental report will be added to the
original report stating the findings. The laboratory results will accompany the supplement
report. Perishable evidence retrieved from a lab after testing/examination will be secured
in a refrigerated temporary evidence locker awaiting transfer to the main Evidence room.
VII. PROCESSING/ DEVELOPING/LIFTING/LABELING FINGERPRINTS:
A. When an officer/detective processes a scene for latent fingerprints, the proper
Department equipment (powder, brushes, tape, etc.), will be utilized.
B. If latent fingerprints are lifted from a scene, the following procedure will be followed:
1. The tape with the lifted print will be placed on the glossy side of the plain
white or black fingerprint backing. On the back of the backing, the following
information will be included:
a. Print A, B, C, etc.
b. Report Number,
c. Officer/Detective and DSN,
d. Location from where prints are lifted from, and
e. Date.
C. All latent fingerprint evidence will be stored in manila envelopes provided by the St.
Louis County Police Department marked “Latent Fingerprint Evidence”. The face of the
envelope is to be completed by the officer who processed the scene.
D. The Bureau of Investigations will convey the fingerprint evidence to the St. Louis
County Latent Print Laboratory for processing.
E. When evidence is conveyed to the station for latent print processing, the officer
seizing the evidence or the St. Louis County Latent Lab Technicians will do the
processing.
G. Elimination prints will be obtained from the victim(s) by this Department as soon as
possible.
VIII. CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION REPORTING:
A. If the officer processing the crime scene is not the reporting officer, the processing
officer will prepare a CARE written supplement that will include the following
information:

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD – 33.1
Page 7 of 7
1. Date/Time of arrival at the scene,
2. Location of the crime,
3. Name of victim(s), if known,
4. Action taken at the scene (i.e. number of photographs taken, measurements
taken, and a listing of physical evidence recovered),
5. Report Number, and
6. Fingerprint processing results whether negative or positive.
B. When crime scenes are not processed, the reporting officer will state the reasons why
in the narrative portion of the report.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 9/27/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 5/29/2020
Revised: 3/1/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

