OPD – 33.2
Page 1 of 11
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Abandoned Property
Disposition of Property
Evidence Property Management
Evidence Custodian
Found Property
Packaging
Storage
________________________________________________________________________
EVIDENCE PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
I. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to develop and maintain strict measures
with respect to the handling, security, and disposition of property, and that any changes in
its custody will be properly and fully documented.
II. RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. The impounding officer is the member of the Department who initially receives the
evidence and initiates the chain of custody.
B. The Evidence Custodian is the Department member accountable for control and
maintenance of all evidence accepted by or stored in the Department’s Evidence Room
and Temporary Holding Lockers.
C. The Evidence Room and Temporary Holding Lockers are the facilities utilized by the
Department to store evidence. The Evidence Room is secured by a locked door and
proximity card access control. A dual authentication method is used, meaning that to
enter the Evidence Room, a proximity card must be presented to the card reader AND a
proper code must be entered on the keypad. Entrance to the Evidence Room is also
continuously monitored by the Department’s surveillance system.

-- 1 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 2 of 11
D. Entry to the Evidence Room is controlled to prevent loss, theft, alterations,
unauthorized removal or any other compromise of evidence stored by the Department.
Entry is limited to the Evidence Custodian. In extraordinary circumstances, (i.e. fire, fire
sprinkler deployment, etc.) the Chief of Police and Deputy Chief may enter the Evidence
Room to assess damage and protect items stored in the Room.
1. Other than the Evidence Custodian, authorized personnel having a need to
enter the Evidence Room will complete the Evidence Room Sign-In Log
immediately upon entering the Evidence Room and will sign out upon leaving the
Evidence Room. The Evidence Custodian will be responsible for maintaining all
Evidence Room sign-in/sign-out logs.
E. The Temporary Holding Lockers are secured by officers after submitting
evidence/property. Once secured, the Temporary Holding Lockers can only be accessed
from inside the Evidence Room by the Evidence Custodian.
F. Physical Evidence is any substance or material found or recovered in connection with
a criminal investigation.
G. Property management is the responsibility of the Evidence Custodian, who has
primary responsibility of property control. The Property Management System includes
property in custody, found, recovered, and evidentiary property.
H. The Evidence Custodian shall be accountable for control of all property accepted by
or stored in the Department’s property storage area(s). The Evidence Custodian shall be
responsible for receiving, storing, maintaining, releasing, and accounting for all evidence
in compliance with established Department policy.
III. ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATIONS:
A. The following procedures have been established for receiving in-custody and
evidentiary property by members into Agency control to include:
1. Officer Responsibility - Officers will complete an Olivette Police Department
Evidence envelope or other adequate form of packaging and provide a descriptive
inventory of every item of evidence/property coming into their possession as a
result of their official duties and responsibilities. If required, a St. Louis County
Police Department Evidence Receipt Form will accompany the packaged
evidence/property. The officer will then secure the evidence in one of the
Temporary Holding Lockers prior to their tour of duty ending for that day. The
officer will note the Temporary Holding Locker number in the narrative of his/her
police report and a voicemail message will be left for the Evidence Custodian
advising of the evidence. Perishable evidence (i.e. blood) will be secured in
Temporary Holding Locker #5, as it is refrigerated. This will also be noted in the
police report narrative and a voicemail message will be left for the Bureau of
Investigations advising of the evidence.

-- 2 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 3 of 11
2. As the Bureau of Investigations is routinely responsible for delivering certain
evidence to the crime laboratory, it will be the responsibility of a detective to
notify the Evidence Custodian of any appointments made for the crime lab. Once
notified, the Evidence Custodian will place the appropriate evidence in the
refrigerator located in the Evidence Packaging area and secure the lock. The
evidence will be retrieved by the Bureau of Investigations and delivered to the
appropriate crime laboratory. Evidence receipts will be completed appropriately.
3. Officers that need to secure evidence in the Blood Dry or Exterior Large
Evidence Area will use the following procedure:
a. Notify the watch commander, who will retrieve the appropriate prox
card from the key box in the Roll Call room.
b. Use the prox card to access the desired evidence storage area.
c. Secure the evidence inside the appropriate area.
d. Drop the prox card into Evidence Locker #2.
e. Notify the Evidence Custodian about the evidence.
f. Officers will note in the narrative of the police report in which area the
evidence was secured.
Once the evidence is retrieved, the Evidence Custodian will return the prox card
to the key box. If evidence needs to be secured in the Blood Dry or Exterior
Large Evidence Area, but access is denied because there is already evidence in
one of those rooms, officers should notify the Evidence Custodian who will
respond to the station to remove the evidence from the area(s) and secure all
evidence in the Evidence room.
4. Officers will enter all evidence/property into the PMI Evidence Tracker
evidence system prior to placing the evidence/property into a Temporary Holding
Locker:
a. The Evidence Custodian will retrieve the property from the Temporary
Holding Lockers and place it into the Department’s inventory.
b. Perishable evidence will be requested from the Evidence Custodian by
any officer(usually a detective) of this Agency designated to transfer the
evidence to the Missouri State Highway Patrol Crime Laboratory or other
approved facility.

-- 3 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 4 of 11
c. Once the property has been officially placed under the Department’s
control, the property can only be released for:
1. Further investigation,
2. Court release,
3. Other official purposes, or
4. Returning to the owner.
d. The release will be made by the Evidence Custodian of the property
needed. The Evidence Custodian will batch-out the requested
evidence/property in the PMI Evidence Tracker evidence system
indicating the date, time, reason, and officer receiving the
evidence/property. If property is released to the property owner, a Property
Receipt Form #OPD – F1040 will be completed and filed with the police
report.
e. The chain of custody documentation ensures accountability and/or
uninterrupted chain of custody until final disposition.
f. Officers are prohibited at all times from storing evidence in desks,
lockers, vehicles, or other places that are not secure, or would interrupt the
chain of custody.
g. Evidence returned from court or the crime laboratory will be placed in a
Temporary Holding Locker for retrieval by the Evidence Custodian. The
securing officer may leave a voicemail message for the Evidence
Custodian. The Evidence Custodian will then batch-in the
evidence/property in the PMI Evidence Tracker evidence system and
return the evidence/property to the Evidence Room.
h. Personal use of any evidence is prohibited.
5. The officer submitting property into evidence will complete a police report
containing the following information:
a. Accurate record of events that transpired at the scene in connection with
the investigation,
b. Location of the crime,
c. Name of victim(s), if known,
d. Name of suspect(s), if known,

-- 4 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 5 of 11
e. Report number,
f. Circumstances detailing how the evidence came into possession of the
Police Department, and
g. Detailed description of items - Give as much information about the
evidence as possible including the location where the item(s) was found.
The description should include:
1) Make,
2) Model or model number, if known,
3) Serial number,
4) Color(s), and
5) Unique characteristics, markings, etc.
IV. STORAGE AND PACKAGING:
A. Secure storage areas for particular items are located within the Evidence Room and
have been established for handling valuable and sensitive items of evidence.
1. Firearms, money, jewelry, precious metals, and drugs, etc. are stored in secured
rooms within the Evidence Room. Drugs will be stored in the Drug Room and
firearms, money, jewelry, precious metals, etc. will be stored in the Arms/Cash
room.
2. Bicycles will be stored inside the Large Storage Room within the Evidence
Room.
3. Vehicles will be towed to the appropriate tow lot. If processing is required, an
officer may respond immediately, or a “Hold” can be placed on the vehicle until it
can be processed.
B. The PMI Evidence Tracker evidence barcoded system is used by this command to
maintain evidence/property records. Evidence/property is entered into the system by the
officer who seized the evidence/property. The PMI Evidence Tracker evidence system is
maintained by the Evidence Custodian. The PMI Evidence Tracker system reflects the
status of the evidence/property held by the Department. The status information reflected
is:
1. Report number;

-- 5 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 6 of 11
2. CAD number;
3. Tracking number;
4. Offense/Incident location;
5. Number of packages;
6. Offense;
7. Evidence Description;
8. Evidence Type;
9. Victim/Complainant;
10. Suspect;
11. Date;
12. Officers DSN;
13. Seized Location;
14. Transported by;
15. Reason seized;
16. Temporary Location;
17. Evidence Room Location;
18. Case Status;
19. Disposition;
20. Date of Disposition; and
21. Notes.
V. DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY:
A. Whenever possible, release of property back to the owner should be affected as
expeditiously as is consistent with applicable law. Prompt, authorized property removal
(final disposition/destruction) prevents an overload on the property management system

-- 6 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 7 of 11
and reduces the requirement for additional storage space. Also, lack of prompt
disposition procedures further deprives owners of the use of their property.
B. The investigating officer will make every attempt to identify the owner(s) of found or
stolen property by such means as performing computer checks on serial numbers,
information from prior police reports, identification markings/information, etc. If
property is recovered and the owner is identified, the officer will attempt to notify the
owner of the property by telephone or by letter that their property is in the custody of the
Police Department, and they can respond to the Department for property release (through
proper verification of owner).
C. With the prosecutor’s approval, and based on the Missouri Criminal Code, prompt
photographing and return of the property to victims will be accomplished whenever the
physical evidence is not needed in a court case, and the photograph is acceptable for
evidentiary purposes.
1. In any prosecution for wrongful taking, photographs of the personal property
alleged to have been wrongfully taken shall be deemed competent evidence of
such personal property and shall be admissible in any proceeding, hearing or trial
of the case to the same extent as if such property had been introduced as evidence.
In addition to the personal property, such photographs shall clearly depict the
police report number.
2. It should be noted that when photographs are to be used in the place of the
actual physical evidence or personal property, the photograph is to be attached to
a Property Receipt Form #OPD – F1040, signed by the property owner/agent.
The photo and receipt are then properly marked and packaged as evidence and
submitted to the Evidence Custodian for safekeeping.
D. Seized property must have a claim filed for return within 30 days from the date
obtained. The property placed into the evidence room will be disposed of as follows:
1. Returned - This is property that may be released to the owner after the proper
identification is made to verify ownership.
2. Sold - If such property has remained unclaimed for more than 30 days, said
property may be sold at public auction by the Chief of Police, which said public
auction shall be held at the City Hall and ten (10) days' notice of which said
public auction shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in St.
Louis County.
If no bids are received at such public sale, the property may be sold at a private
sale for the best price offered. Any property for which no bid is received at public
or private sale shall be destroyed by the Police Department, and a certificate
thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Section 200.030)

-- 7 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 8 of 11
3. Destroyable - Property that cannot be returned to the owner. The property is
either illegal to possess, ownership is unknown, or property has no value.
4. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number.
E. Handguns, rifles, and/or shotguns will be returned to the rightful owner only upon
proof of ownership or written authority from the prosecutor.
1. Firearms must be claimed within 30 days from the date of seizure.
2. The firearm will not be returned if it was used in the commission of a felony.
A court order is required for return.
3. The firearm will not be returned to a person having previous felony
convictions.
4. Firearms that do not meet established standards for safety or have altered serial
numbers shall be destroyed.
5. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number.
F. The Evidence Custodian shall make every effort to identify and notify the owner, or
custodian of the property, for any returnable items that are not illegal to possess.
1. Specified time to collect the items(s) is 30 days from the date of recovery.
2. Final release requires proof of ownership, Bill of Sale, Receipt, or a detailed
description of property, which in the judgment of the Evidence Custodian would
only be known to the rightful owner or representative in control. A court order
may be required when no other means are available to show ownership.
3. Final disposition of found, recovered, and evidentiary property should be
accomplished within six (6) months after legal requirements have been satisfied.
4. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number.
G. Illegal weapons as defined in Federal Statute, State Statute, or Municipal Ordinance,
and seized by the Department, shall be reported to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms and the United States Treasury, and these weapons shall be relinquished to
either agency if requested.
1. All weapons that are not returned to the owner shall be retained by the
Evidence Custodian.

-- 8 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 9 of 11
2. A court order will be issued by a Judge of the St. Louis County Circuit Court
authorizing the destruction of weapons.
3. The Evidence Custodian will submit a memorandum and a copy of the receipt
to the Deputy Chief documenting the destruction.
4. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number.
H. Narcotics contraband seized shall be conveyed to the St. Louis County Police
Department Crime Laboratory for analysis and safekeeping. Marijuana charges of less
than 35 grams will not be accepted by the Laboratory.
1. After State cases are disposed of, the Crime Laboratory will return the
contraband to this Command.
2. A court order from the St. Louis County Prosecutor will be obtained
authorizing the destruction of the contraband.
3. The contraband, along with the court order, will be conveyed back to the Crime
Laboratory for destruction. A receipt will be obtained.
4. After Municipal cases are disposed of, the City Prosecutor or the St. Louis
County Prosecutor may issue the court order for destruction of the contraband.
The contraband, along with the court order, will then be conveyed to the Crime
Laboratory for destruction. A receipt will be obtained.
5. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number.
I. Seized and/or forfeited property, including controlled substances, weapons and
explosives will not be used by Department personnel for investigative or training
purposes.
J. Monies seized by this Department shall be returned to the rightful owner upon proof of
ownership, or written authority by the prosecutor or court order.
All money or cash coming into the possession of the Police Department of the City of
Olivette from any source whatsoever which has remained unclaimed for a period of 30
days shall be delivered to the City Clerk and shall be held in a separate fund thereafter
under the supervision of the City Clerk for a period of one year.
1. If said money or cash is claimed within said period of one year, it shall be
delivered to the person exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership of the fund.

-- 9 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 10 of 11
2. If said money is not claimed within said period, it shall become a part of the
general revenue of the City of Olivette (Section 200.040).
3. The disposition and filing will be noted in the PMI Evidence Tracker system
under the relevant report number
VI. FOUND OR ABANDONED PROPERTY (EXCEPT MOTOR VEHICLES)
A. Definitions
1. Abandoned Property - Any property to which the true owner has, in writing,
declared his intention to relinquish any claim or right thereto, or any unclaimed
property which has been held for at least one year.
2. Found Property - Any property which comes into possession of a Department
employee but does not play any part in a specific crime.
B. Department employees who seize found property or abandoned property shall make
every attempt to locate the owner and release the property.
1. Owner located: Upon locating the owner of found or abandoned property, a
Department property receipt form (OPD – F1040) will be completed upon release
of said property.
2. Owner not located: Found or abandoned property, in which all means have
been exhausted in contacting the owner, will be entered into the PMI Evidence
Tracker System, properly packaged and placed in an evidence locker. Bicycles
will be entered into the PMI Evidence Tracker System, properly tagged and
secured in the Large Storage Room within the Evidence Room.
C. When an investigation reveals that found or abandoned property is associated with a
violation of the law, that property will be handled as evidence.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 9/24/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016

-- 10 of 11 --

OPD – 33.2
Page 11 of 11
Revised: 4/20/2018
Revised: 4/26/2018
Revised: 10/9/2018
Revised: 7/8/2020
Revised: 3/1/2024
Expiration: Indefinite
Cancels OPD - 33.5

-- 11 of 11 --

