OPD - 33.3
Page 1 of 3
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Evidence and Property Inspections
Evidence and Property Inventory
Evidence Audit
EVIDENCE INSPECTION AND AUDIT PROCESS
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish an inspection and audit process for the
Departmental property management function. The intent of the process shall be to ensure
that policy and procedural directives are being followed, and that the integrity of the
system is properly maintained.
II. EVIDENCE AND PROPERTY INSPECTIONS:
To determine compliance with Department procedures governing the control of evidence
and property, inspections will be regularly performed as described in Section IV, or at the
direction of the Chief of Police.
1. The Evidence Custodian shall be responsible to inspect the various aspects of
the Department’s evidence and property control system. Areas of concern should
be:
a. Evidence/property storage areas are clean and orderly,
b. Integrity of property is being maintained,
c. Department directives concerning property are being followed,
d. Property is protected from deterioration or damage due to
environmental deficiencies,
e. Property control records are current and annotated correctly, and
f. Evidence/property is being disposed of promptly.

-- 1 of 3 --

OPD - 33.3
Page 2 of 3
2. Upon completion of each inspection, the evidence custodian shall submit the
findings in writing to the Deputy Chief.
3. In the event the report details deficiencies or recommends corrective action be
taken, remedial steps shall be instituted whenever possible. Should a deficiency
require action by the upper command staff of the Department, remedial steps will
be instituted in accordance with fiscal and management policies.
4. The Chief of Police shall direct unannounced inspections of the property
control function as necessary.
III. EVIDENCE AND PROPERTY INVENTORY:
An inventory of all evidence and property shall be conducted whenever one of the
officers responsible for the property management function has been reassigned or leaves
the Department. The inventory shall be jointly conducted by the newly appointed
Evidence Custodian and the current Evidence Custodian (who shall serve as the designee
of the Chief of Police). The purpose of such an inventory shall be to ensure that evidence
records are current and properly annotated. This will generally not require an accounting
of each piece of evidence/property, but involve a sufficient sampling of same to ensure
that the property management system has been administered according to established
procedures. Should discrepancies be discovered, they shall be documented by the newly
appointed Evidence Officer in a report directed through the chain of command to the
Deputy Chief. In such an instance the Chief of Police may direct:
1. Corrective action as initiated by the Deputy Chief. In the event the
discrepancies noted are of a serious or repetitive nature the Chief of Police may
direct:
a. A full -scale audit be conducted, and/or
b. An internal affairs investigation is conducted.
IV. INSPECTIONS & AUDITS:
A. A designated officer serves as the primary Evidence Custodian for the Department. In
that capacity, the primary Evidence Custodian, or his/her designee, will semi-annually
conduct an inspection of the property/evidence storage facilities to determine that records
are correct and to ensure that procedures are being adhered to. The first inspection will be
conducted in the first quarter of the calendar year, with the second inspection being
completed in the third quarter of the calendar year, unless otherwise directed.
B. Whenever an officer is newly designated as the primary Evidence Custodian, an audit
of property and related records will be completed. The newly designated primary
Evidence Custodian will conduct said audit with an employee designated by the Chief of

-- 2 of 3 --

OPD - 33.3
Page 3 of 3
Police. The audit will be sufficient to ensure the continued integrity of the property
management system and the accountability of the property and associated records.
C. At least annually, the Chief of Police shall appoint one (1) supervisor, not routinely or
directly associated with “property management”, or another individual from an outside
agency (e.g., another law enforcement agency), to conduct an audit of the Property
Management facilities and function. Said audit will be in accordance with accepted
auditing procedures.
D. At the conclusion of the audit, the officer assigned to conduct it shall draft a report
detailing their findings and submit it to the Deputy Chief. The Deputy Chief and Chief of
Police shall subsequently discuss the audit with the appointed supervisor and corrective
action initiated (if required).
E. Periodic unannounced inspections of property storage areas will be conducted annually
by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. These inspections may include entrance into
the evidence area to inspect for cleanliness, orderliness, and tracing a few pieces of
property and evidence to assure that they are in the proper place as stated in the area’s
records.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/15/2009
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 7/8/2020
Revised: 3/1/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 3 --

