OPD – 35.1
Page 1 of 10
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Evacuation
Fire Safety
Holding Facility Inspections
Supervision of Detainees
Holding Cells
Threats
HOLDING FACILITY PROCEDURES
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish procedures to ensure a safe and secure
holding facility for prisoners awaiting interrogation, arrest processing, transfer to other
agencies, municipal court appearances, or other administrative procedures and to
maintain these facilities in a sanitary and safe manner. All personnel shall adhere to these
procedures and shall be alert to any problems or conditions that may compromise
security, safety or the well-being of detained prisoners.
II. ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION:
A. The Deputy Chief serves as the holding facility administrator.
B. The Deputy Chief shall have primary responsibility for all aspects of the holding
facility to include security, sanitation and maintenance, safety, supervision, and
designation of such personnel necessary to safeguard the overall well-being of the
prisoners.
C. If non-essential personnel are granted access to the secure holding facility, their
presence should not violate a detainee’s right to privacy, impede facility operations, or
obstruct or frustrate acquisition and development of information for presentation in court
by either the prosecution or the defense. Non-essential persons shall be prohibited from

-- 1 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 2 of 10
entering the holding facility when a detainee is present, other than in emergency
situations.
III. SUPERVISION OF DETAINEES:
A. Agency staff will ensure supervision of detainees.
B. Secure holding facility areas are continuously monitored via closed circuit monitoring
system.
C. Electronic surveillance cameras are positioned so that the possibility of invading
detainees’ personal privacy by use of the surveillance cameras is reduced.
IV. HOLDING CELLS:
A. The Department has three holding cells located within the holding facility. Two of
the cells are equipped to hold two adult prisoners each; the third cell is ADA compliant,
is equipped to hold one prisoner, and provides sight and sound separation for the
purposes of holding a juvenile. If this cell is not being occupied by a juvenile, it may be
used for a prisoner with certain medical conditions and/or disabilities, or as an additional
cell if the other two cells are occupied to capacity. Officers of this Department are
authorized to use the holding cells to detain prisoners being held for municipal bonds,
prior to being processed for arrest, prior to court appearances, or prior to questioning
conducted at the Olivette Police Department. Officers are accountable for prisoner
supervision and welfare while utilizing the holding cells.
1. Each cell is equipped with audio/video surveillance.
2. Males will be separated from females.
3. At no time will juveniles be placed in these cells with adult prisoners.
4. Prisoners will not be restrained to fixed objects.
5. Prisoners detained in holding cells will have access to water, restrooms, and
other needs by requesting service from an officer. Visual observation of
unattended detainees will be monitored by East Central Dispatch Center personnel
at least every 30 minutes. Prisoners may also be monitored by officers via closed
circuit monitoring system.
B. Prisoners of the Opposite Sex
While this list may not be exhaustive, officers may routinely enter a cell occupied by a
prisoner for the following reasons:
1. In the event of an emergency.

-- 2 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 3 of 10
2. To accomplish specific tasks such as prisoner transfer, bonding or release,
meals, and medication.
3. Except for the situations detailed above, no Department member shall enter a
cell occupied by a prisoner of the opposite sex.
C. Holding Cell Construction:
Each cell is equipped with fixtures to provide basic conditions for prisoners.
1. Two (2) cells have two (2) concrete, elevated slab beds with one (1) mattress
each;
2. One (1) cell (ADA compliant) has one (1) concrete, elevated slab bed with a
mattress;
3. An air ventilation system;
4. Sink with running water for drinking and sanitation purposes;
5. Toilet and toilet paper; and
6. Lighting as required by the National Electrical Code (1999 Edition), which
has been adopted by the City of Olivette under Municipal Code. All lighting
fixtures are re-enforced.
V. CELL MAINTENANCE
A. For safety reasons, it is essential that every precaution be taken to ensure that
individuals doing regular or special maintenance/repairs do not leave equipment or tools
in the holding facility.
B. Cleaning
1. In order to provide a safe and clean environment for all prisoners, it is
necessary for contracted cleaning personnel to enter and clean the holding
facility. Cleaning will be conducted by contracted personnel once per week
when the cells are unoccupied.
2. Daily maintenance of the cells, such as trash disposal, shall be monitored by
officers.
3. It is the duty of the watch commander to ensure holding cells are clean,
prisoner supplies are stocked, and the holding facility is property maintained.

-- 3 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 4 of 10
A daily log will be completed by the on-duty watch commander twice per
shift to ensure holding facility maintenance.
VI. EVACUATION PLAN:
A. Emergency evacuation routes are posted throughout the Olivette City Center,
including the holding facility.
B. Emergency evacuation routes are designated by signed emergency exits.
VII. FIRE SAFETY:
A. The Olivette City Center, including the Police Department and holding facility, is
equipped with smoke detectors, fire suppression equipment, exit signs, emergency battery
powered hallway lights, and fire extinguishers.
B. No smoking is allowed in the building.
C. The following inspections/tests are conducted in the Police Department to include the
holding facility:
1. Daily visual inspection of fire suppression equipment;
2. Semi-annual testing of fire alarms;
3. Annual certification of fire extinguishers; and
4. Testing of automatic fire detection and alarms systems, as required by local
fire code
D. In the event of a fire or other emergency requiring evacuation of personnel and or
detainees, detainees should be evacuated to a secure area nearest the exit used.
E. Fire and rescue personnel will be immediately dispatched by Communications if
needed.
F. The Watch Commander will be immediately notified of all such incidents.
G. Any fires in the holding facility will require a detailed police report. In cases where
the source or cause of the fire cannot be readily determined, or arson is suspected, the
Chief of Police will be immediately notified to initiate the investigation.
H. The Department training coordinator will be responsible for scheduling initial training
for all personnel on the use of the holding cells, including fire suppression equipment.
Refresher training will be conducted at least every four (4) years.

-- 4 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 5 of 10
VII. POLICE OFFICER RESPONSIBILITIES:
The handling and care of prisoners is the responsibility of the arresting officer or officer
designated by the supervisor on duty.
VIII. HOLDING FACILITY INSPECTIONS:
A. The on-duty shift commander shall conduct at least one daily inspection of the
holding facility at the beginning of his/her tour of duty to ensure continued adherence to
operating policy and procedures.
B. Inspections shall include, but are not limited to security, safety, sanitation and
emergency equipment considerations, as outlined below:
1. Any conditions which may harbor or be conducive for breeding pests, rodents
etc.;
2. Any weapons and/or contraband;
3. Physical checks of all cells for detainees tampering and operational wear;
4. Ensure the closed-circuit monitoring system is in proper working order.
An inspection report prepared by the shift commander will be forwarded to the Chief of
Police with the results. If a police report is needed, the report will be prepared and
forwarded to the Chief of Police.
C. A staff review of holding rooms, cells, and procedures will occur at least once every
three (3) years.
IX. SECURITY AND CONTROL:
A. The arresting officer or other designated commissioned employee shall be responsible
for security of the holding facility.
B. When prisoners are present, firearms and knives are not permitted in the holding
facility. Police officers entering the holding facility will secure their weapons in gun
lockers. Only under emergency conditions regarding the safety of personnel in the
holding facility, as necessary, will officers be allowed to enter the facility with firearms
and knives. Tasers and pepper spray are permitted in the holding facility by personnel
trained in the use of the same.
1. Officers shall use the most appropriate gun locker when entering the secure
holding facility when prisoners are present.

-- 5 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 6 of 10
2. Gun lockers are available in the hallway inside the police department leading to
the secure holding facility and in the sally port prior to entering the secure
holding facility.
3. When delivering a prisoner to another agency, officers shall comply with the
receiving agency’s safety procedures for securing weapons and when restraints
can be removed from the prisoner.
C. Police officers are provided with emergency radio buttons on their department issued
radios and, in the event of panic or duress situations, will press the button to alert the
dispatchers of the situations. In addition, panic strips are strategically placed on the walls
of the booking area, sally port and interview rooms. When struck, an audible alert will
sound within the Police Department and alert the City’s monitoring company, who will in
turn notify East Central Dispatch Center of the area from where the alert is activated.
Dispatch will notify other police personnel of the situation and assign a patrol unit and
supervisor to respond to the appropriate area. Officers who are in the station and
available should immediately respond to the area of the panic alarm.
D. Only police officers (or those personnel participating in the booking) are permitted in
the holding facility, during the booking process. Civilian employees, citizens, or other
non-essential personnel are not permitted in the holding facility, while prisoners are being
held, without the expressed permission of the shift commander, Deputy Chief or Chief of
Police.
E. Handcuffs or other restraining devices may be removed at the discretion of the
arresting officer, based upon the conduct of the prisoner, the offense for which the arrest
was made and related circumstances.
F. All holding facility entry/exit doors shall be secured during the booking process.
Cells occupied by prisoners shall have the door secured as well. Doors shall be tested for
vulnerability after they are secured.
G. A security check, including a search for weapons and contraband, will be made of
each unoccupied cell prior to use. In addition, a cell should be checked when it becomes
unoccupied. The officer placing the prisoner in the cell and removing the prisoner from
the cell is responsible for the security check. Any items found in the cell shall be reported
immediately to supervisory personnel verbally and if instructed by the supervisor, in
writing.
H. Special care shall be taken to ensure that no arrestee is placed in a cell while in
possession of any item that may be used to harm him/herself or others, to include:
1. Sharp instruments,
2. Eyeglasses (an exception for necessity may be made by the Watch
Commander),

-- 6 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 7 of 10
3. Shoe or boot laces,
4. Belts, ties, headbands,
5. Scarves, handkerchiefs, hair ribbons,
6. Eating utensils and smoking materials,
7. Chemicals or materials that, if ingested, could result in poisoning or other
medical emergency, and
8. Other miscellaneous personal property.
If arrestees possess any of the aforementioned items, the items shall be seized during the
booking process and included in the prisoner’s property.
I. Prisoners brought in through the sally port will be placed in the staging area in order
for officers to collect any and all personal property and begin the booking process.
J. When prisoners are removed from the staging area, they will be thoroughly searched
for any contraband or personal property remaining on their persons prior to completing
the booking process.
K. All prisoner property will be assigned a locker. Both the prisoner cell number and
locker number will be written on the prisoner’s booking sheet and hung outside the cell
door.
L. Prisoner Meals
Meals will be provided to prisoners during the following times:
1. Breakfast - 0600 - 0800hrs
2. Lunch - 1100 - 1300hrs
3. Dinner - 1800 - 2000hrs
4. No utensils will be given to prisoners.
5. Trash will be collected as soon as possible after the prisoner has eaten.
6. All meals will be logged on the Booking Sheet Prisoner Log.

-- 7 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 8 of 10
K. Visitation
Prisoners are prohibited from visitation in the booking area. Visitation will only be
conducted via the visitation booth.
L. Mail
With the exception of prescription medication, prisoners are prohibited from receiving
packages or mail of any kind.
M. Transfers from Secure Holding Facility
When a prisoner is transferred from the secure holding facility to another facility, but
remains in this Department’s custody, officers will note on the booking sheet log and
ECDC Prisoner Log:
1. The reason for the transfer;
2. Date of transfer;
3. Initial booking time at this Command; and
4. Time of transfer.
X. ESCAPES:
If a prisoner escapes from the holding facility, the officer will notify the police dispatcher
who will:
A. Sound the alert tone and request emergency radio traffic only.
B. Advise patrol units and supervisor of the escape and assign the necessary amount of
units to respond to the station.
C. Summon medical aid for persons injured as a result of the escape.
D. Broadcast an appropriate "be on the lookout":
1. Describe the escapee including method of escape and weapons involved.
2. Provide the last known location of the subject.
3. Provide direction of travel if known.
4. Provide charges.

-- 8 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 9 of 10
E. Notify the following agencies:
1. St. Louis County Police
2. University City Police
3. Ladue Police
4. Creve Coeur Police
5. Overland Police
6. Missouri State Highway Patrol
F. The on-duty shift commander will direct field units to:
1. Establish a cordon around the area where the suspect may be located.
2. Establish a field command post.
XI. THREATS:
Should a threat be made against a prisoner held by this Department, or an employee
working within the building, or the building itself, (i.e. bomb threat, arson threat), the
following procedures will be in effect:
A. The employee receiving the threat shall immediately notify the on-duty shift
commander and document the threat.
B. The on-duty shift commander will provide extra security to the building, to include
the fire department if appropriate.
C. The on-duty shift commander will notify the Chief of Police.
D. The Chief of Police will order evacuation if deemed necessary.
E. The on-duty shift commander will be responsible for preparing a written report
documenting the incident.
F. If evacuation is ordered, any prisoners will be immediately transported to the nearest
holding facility with accommodations.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 9 of 10 --

OPD – 35.1
Page 10 of 10
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/11/2009
Revised: 8/26/2013
Revised: 5/26/2016
Revised: 1/3/2017
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 7/5/2018
Revised: 10/24/2018
Revised: 3/27/2020
Revised: 3/15/2024
Revised: 1/6/2025
Expiration: Indefinite
Cancels OPD - 35.3

-- 10 of 10 --

