OPD – 36.1
Page 1 of 11
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Communications
911 Systems
Computer Aided Dispatching
Radio Procedures
Severe Weather
Disasters
Mutual Assistance
__________________________________________________________________________________
COMMUNICATIONS
I. POLICY:
The purpose of this policy is to outline the operational procedures used by the East Central Dispatch
Center (ECDC).
II. RADIO COMMUNICATIONS CENTER:
A. Radio communications will be provided by the East Central Dispatch Center (ECDC) who will
provide efficient response and assistance to the citizens requesting emergency service. The East Central
Dispatch Center is also charged with providing dispatching and related police information services as
well as general information and non-emergency assistance to the citizens.
B. The East Central Dispatch Center is located inside the Richmond Heights Police Department. The
Dispatch Center is located in a secured area where electronic key access is needed. The Dispatch Center
maintains a recording and playback system. All recordings are stored on a secure hard drive system.
Dispatch supervisors have access to listen to recordings. Officers can gain access to a needed recording(s)
by sending a written request to the on-duty Dispatch Supervisor.
C. East Central dispatchers are authorized to provide basic first aid over the phone. Dispatchers are
trained and certified to use the Priority Dispatch EMD Protocol.

-- 1 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 2 of 11
D. The Dispatch Center has and maintains a generator system to remain fully operational during a power
outage. The generator system is tested weekly by the Richmond Heights Public Works Department.
E. Administration - All radio communications utilizing Federal Communications Commission assigned
radio frequencies shall comply with FCC Rules and Regulations addressing Public Safety Systems.
Refer to Part 90, Subpart B, FCC Rules and Regulations.
F. The East Central Dispatch Center is responsible for the 24-hour radio, automated data and telephone
communications of the Department, and more specifically, continuous communications between the
citizens, the dispatchers and the officers in the field.
G. Command of ECDC shall be with the supervisor of that unit.
H. Emergency Telephone Access - The East Central Dispatch Center is an Emergency 911 Public Service
Answering Point (PSAP) and provides 24-hour, toll-free telephone access for the City of Olivette. This is
accomplished by using the 911 emergency service or regular trunk lines.
I. Emergency Incoming Calls For Assistance:
1. Calls received through the Emergency 911 system shall be given the highest priority. Any
incoming call may be an emergency.
2. All incoming Emergency 911 calls will be answered with the phrase “Emergency 911
(nine-one-one).” The dispatcher will not answer with their name or that of the Police
Department.
3. The dispatcher will immediately determine if the caller has an emergency. When
interviewing the caller, he/she will inquire if they have a police, fire, or medical emergency.
4. On Emergency 911 hang-ups, the dispatcher should call the number back to ascertain the
nature of the call. If voice contact is made with the original caller, the dispatcher must use
their judgment-discretion to determine if an emergency exists or the Emergency 911 call
was made by accident, by a young child, etc.
a. If the number is busy, an operator may interrupt the line if requested.
b. If the dispatcher cannot make contact or is not satisfied with the explanation
received from the call back, police units will be immediately dispatched.
c. If there is an open line or the phone is off the hook, a police unit(s) will be
dispatched to determine if an emergency exists.
d. If the emergency call requires an ambulance or fire equipment, the
dispatcher will dispatch appropriate fire and EMS units. The dispatcher will
dispatch the appropriate police unit(s) while the call is being taken.
e. Dispatchers shall not assume that no emergency exists if a voice is not heard on the
telephone. The person in need of aid may be unable to give a voice communication. Police

-- 2 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 3 of 11
units are to be dispatched to the location indicated by the telephone enhanced 911 System.
III. MISDIRECTED EMERGENCY CALLS:
Although the Emergency 911 System is designed to bring emergency calls to the proper destination,
occasionally calls are received for emergencies which are in another jurisdiction. Communications
personnel will relay such Emergency 911 calls to the proper jurisdiction.
IV. PROCESSING CALLS FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED:
When a TDD call is received a special tone is heard. This tone is different from a fax and computer
modem call. The call is handled using the TDD keyboard to type text messages.
V. GENERAL TELEPHONE SYSTEM:
1. The general number for the police department is 314-645-3000.
2. Calls regarding services not provided by the Police Department will be referred to the proper
number or telephone directory.
VI. EVALUATION AND PRIORITY OF CALLS FOR SERVICE:
Although our goal is an immediate response to all calls for service, workloads and situations may dictate
the availability of officers to handle calls. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the call taker who receives
the call, to be attentive to the victim or witness, and consider that the prioritization of the call will have a
direct impact on the victim or witness and all other persons involved.
1. Priority One calls will be immediately dispatched and include those calls which
involve one or more of the following:
a. There is an imminent risk of death, serious physical injury, or illness.
b. In progress crimes in which immediate response may result in the apprehension of the
perpetrator.
c. Incidents in which a delay in response may result in the nature of the call becoming
more serious.
2. Priority Two calls will be dispatched as soon as possible. Priority Two calls include:
a. Reports of crimes not in progress or delayed reports.
b. Runaway and missing person cases.
c. Motor vehicle crashes with no injury or road blockage.
3. Priority Three calls include complaints or assignments which do not require immediate
attention, but which should be carried out as soon as practical. These include:

-- 3 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 4 of 11
a. Parking and ordinance violation complaints.
b. Administrative assignments.
c. Notifications and delivery of messages.
VII. COMPUTER AIDED DISPATCHING (CAD):
This computer system allows dispatchers, after receiving a call, to enter the information directly into a
computer screen which is then prioritized. All unit activity is tracked.
1. The call taker enters the information on the screen. The call is then dispatched to the
appropriate police unit.
2. The screen will display all pertinent information regarding the call, alert the dispatcher to
pending calls, show call updates and allow inquiries to be made of any incident. Inquiries range
from incident complainant information to officer designations, and any statistical information
associated with the call, such as, Report/ Event Numbers.
3. Each specific call for law enforcement service shall receive a unique event number.
a. The number is computer generated by CAD for each call for service, and/or report.
b. The number will serve as the basis for filing and retrieving subsequent reports of the
incident.
c. The number is indispensable for auditing the communications system.
4. The CAD system will document the following information for each incident or service activity:
a. Date and time of request of complainant or officer.
b. Name and address of complainant, if possible, to include the telephone number. A
spelling of the name will be requested.
c. Type of incident reported.
d. Location of incident reported.
e. Identification of officers (by call letters and DSN) assigned as primary unit or
back-up unit.
f. Time of dispatch.
g. Time of officer arrival.
h. Time of officer return to service
i. Disposition/status of reported incident.

-- 4 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 5 of 11
VIII. GENERAL RADIO PROCEDURES:
ECDC coordinates the accurate exchange of information between the dispatcher and mobile units, or
between mobile units.
1. Through the St. Louis County Emergency Communications Commission, the Department has
several radio frequencies for voice communication at its disposal.
a. ECDC PD N is used for general radio communications including the broadcast
of assignments.
b. The Olivette Support channel is used for car–to-car, surveillance, special
assignments or details, and administrative functions.
2. For interagency communications, the Department will utilize channels as assigned by ECDC or
St. Louis County Police Communications.
3. Radio protocol requires that radio transmissions be brief, concise, and accurate. Dispatchers
and officers alike, must speak clearly, slowly, and without the inflection of emotion or attitude.
a. No profane, derogatory, or humorous language will be tolerated.
b. Personnel will not refer to each other my name but only by assigned unit number or, if
assignment warrants, by DSN.
c. The following “ten codes” may be used:
10-1 Unable to Copy
10-2 Signal Good
10-4 Acknowledgment
10-5 Relay
10-6 Busy -Standby Unless
Urgent
10-7 Out of Service
10-8 In Service
10-9 Repeat
10-10 Fight In Progress
10-13 Weather/Road Condition
10-20 Location
10-21 Call by Phone
J1 - Immediately
10-22 Disregard
10-23 Arrived on Scene
10-24 Assignment Completed
10-25 Report in Person
J-1 Immediately
10-27 Drivers License Record
10-28 Vehicle Registration
10-29 Arrest Information:
J-1 Misdemeanor
J-2 Felony Arrest
J-3 Considered
Dangerous
10-30 Illegal Use of Radio
10-33 EMERGENCY
10-36 Request Correct Time
10-40 Tactical Situation
10-41 Beginning Tour of Duty
10-42 Ending Tour of Duty
10-43 General Information
10-44 Request to Leave Car for:
J-1 Personal Relief
J-2 Vehicle Service
J-3 Vehicle Wash
J-4 Meals
10-46 Motorist Assist
10-50 Vehicle Accident
J1- Minor
J2- Injuries
J3- Road Blocked
J4- Fatality
10-52 Ambulance Notification
10-55 Intoxicated Driver
10-56 Intoxicated Pedestrian
10-59 Escort
10-68 Wanted/Crime
Information
10-76 Enroute To Assignment
10-80 Car to Car Traffic
10-81 Prisoner in Custody
10-82 Confidential
10-83 Switch to City Channel
10-86 Computer Down
10-88 Advise Phone Number
10-89 Confidential
10-92 Contract Patrol:
J-1 Beginning
J-2 Ending
10-95 Bomb Threat

-- 5 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 6 of 11
10-99 Records Indicate Wanted
or Stolen:
J1- Misdemeanor J2- Felony J3- Considered Dangerous
d. The following is the accepted phonetic alphabet used to clarify spelling of names or
license numbers:
A-Adam
B-Boston/ Boy
C-Charles
D-David
E-Edward
F-Frank
G-George
H-Henry
I-Ida
J-John
K-King
L-Lincoln
M-Mary
N-Nora
O-Ocean
P-Paul
Q-Queen
R-Robert
S-Sam
T-Tom
U-Union
V-Victor
W-William
X-Xray
Y-Young
Z-Zebra
4. General radio procedures require that all personnel in radio service be alert to the radio
regardless of their position or status. As units in the field cannot be expected to be fully
knowledgeable of all activity by all personnel, the dispatchers will control the radio system using
the following guidelines:
a. All calls from the dispatcher will be considered official orders and will be carried out by
the assigned unit. This does not limit a police supervisor’s authority to countermand a
dispatch for justifiable reasons.
b. When an officer wishes to transmit, he/she shall wait for the radio to be clear than state
his/her call sign. Only after the dispatcher acknowledges the unit calling shall the officer
proceed with his/her transmission.
c. Emergency radio traffic will take precedence over all other traffic.
d. Officers will advise the dispatcher by voice anytime that they are out of the car or out of
service, including the location and nature. The officer will advise the dispatcher when
returning to service. These actions will be recorded in the CAD system.
e. When an officer stops a car or pedestrian, the officer will notify the dispatcher by voice
transmission, advising the location and description of the vehicle or person
stopped.
f. Officer’s personal cell phones shall not be used to contact ECDC to circumvent official
police radio traffic.
5. Dispatch of Assignments.
a. When receiving IN PROGRESS calls the dispatcher will keep the reporting party on the
line and broadcast as much descriptive information as possible until the officer (s) arrives
on the scene.

-- 6 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 7 of 11
b. All high priority calls will be dispatched via voice radio.
c. Calls requiring more than one officer to respond shall include but are not limited to: (In
addition, a supervisor will be dispatched on all calls in bold.)
1). Homicides.
2). Shootings (to include accidental
shootings)
3). Assaults in progress
13). Accidental Death (To include
Sudden Deaths/Suicides)
14). Rapes
15). Robberies in progress (To include
Attempt)
4). Burglaries in progress.
5). Larcenies in progress.
6). Disturbances.
7). Bomb Threats
8). Prowlers.
9). Mental Cases (OBS)
10). Alarm Sounding (Burglary)
11). Suspicious Occupied Auto.
12). Keep the peace.
16). Open door or window
17). Fight in Progress
18). 10-50 J2 on the Interstate
19). 10-50 J4
20). Pedestrian Check
21). Call for Police
22). Shots fired
23). Hazardous Material Spills
24). Hold-up Alarm
d. Use of Alert Tones and Markers:
i. ALERT 1 (brief single tone) – This will signify that a vehicle an officer has
stopped is stolen or wanted; that a stopped person is wanted, known to be armed
and dangerous; or that a similar reason exists (i.e. history as O.B.S.) to believe that
the stopped individual could pose a threat to the officer.
ii. ALERT 2 (high-low tone, alternating signal) – This will signify, an officer is in
trouble, a crime is in progress, a fleeing suspect or vehicle is entering a member
city from another direction, or information is to be broadcast of an emergency
nature.
iii. ALERT 3 (one half-second tone transmitted every ten seconds) – This alert has
been designed to signify that a serious situation exists and that all routine and
non-emergency radio traffic shall be held until the situation has stabilized.

-- 7 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 8 of 11
IX. OFFICER INITIATED EMERGENCIES:
In the event an officer finds himself/herself in an emergency situation, the officer has the ability to notify
ECDC and other patrol units via car radio or mobile radio. Either method of notification will result in
immediate assistance being sent to the requesting officer.
X. RADIO IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICERS:
Patrol officers will be assigned their sector number as their radio call sign as follows: municipal code,
shift and sector. For example: 6411 would be the call sign for Olivette (64), day watch (1), West sector
(1). 6422 would be the call sign for Olivette (64), evening watch (2), East sector (2).
1. The Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Support Services, Detectives, Traffic and
Community Engagement will have permanently assigned call signs.
2. The call sign for the shift commander will be 6410 for day watch or 6420 for evening watch.
3. Any specialized details will use the 6490 series.
XI. ACCESS TO INFORMATION:
Communications personnel have immediate access to computerized and printed resource information,
including but not limited to:
1. The CAD system, which maintains in real-time identification and status of on-duty personnel
and officer in charge.
2. The CAD database, which includes:
a. Roster of all agency personnel including home addresses and telephone numbers.
b. Address and telephone number data for addresses in Olivette.
c. Law enforcement agencies
d. Utility contacts
e. Frequently called numbers including hospitals, cabs, radio repair, etc.
3. Printed files on alarm and business emergency contacts
4. Hazardous Material Reference Books
5. Copy of the City of Olivette Emergency Operations Plan
6. Printed maps of the City
7. Community Services Directories

-- 8 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 9 of 11
8. NCIC and REJIS manuals
9. Tactical Dispatch Plans
XII. SECTOR PLANS:
The shift commander will advise the police dispatcher the appropriate sector plan at the beginning of the
shift. The sector plan will be determined based on manpower. The highest-ranking officer will be the
shift commander.
XIII. ACCEPTING/ DELIVERING EMERGENCY MESSAGES:
Field personnel under the following conditions may deliver emergency messages:
1. The message cannot be delivered by any other means.
2. Notifications to contact other law enforcement agencies.
3. Death notifications.
4. Check the welfare of individuals who have been unreachable by others.
XIV. SEVERE WEATHER WARNINGS:
If the Watch Commander learns that a tornado warning is in effect for this area, or that there has been an
actual sighting in or near the City of Olivette, he/she should contact ECDC to see if they are aware of the
situation. If not, the Watch Commander will have ECDC notify the St. Louis County Office of
Emergency Management who will control the sounding of all area sirens.
Emergency warning siren tests will occur on the first Monday of each month, at 11:00 a.m. It is the
responsibility of the Watch Commander to ensure that all sirens within Olivette are operational and report
any non-operating sirens to St. Louis County Authorities. If any sirens are not functioning, the dispatcher
will contact the St. Louis County Office of Emergency Management at (314) 615-9551 and report the
malfunctions.
XV. DISASTERS:
Information pertinent to disasters, civil disturbances, or severe weather conditions should be broadcast to
units in the field as soon as it becomes available.
1. Upon being notified of an occurrence, which could be classified as a disaster, the dispatchers
on duty will immediately notify the on-duty shift commander. The dispatcher will direct the
appropriate sector car to the scene, along with all necessary emergency units. The shift
commander will immediately respond to the scene, at which time a decision will be made on
whether to activate the City of Olivette Emergency Operations Plan. The shift commander will
activate the communications matrix.
2. After activation of the plan, and depending on the nature and scope of the disaster, the
following immediate notifications may also be necessary, for possible use of their services and

-- 9 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 10 of 11
resources:
a. Mercy Hospital and St. Mary’s Hospital;
b. University City Fire Department, Ladue Fire Department, Creve Coeur Fire Protection
District and Community Fire Protection District;
c. Spire Gas Company;
d. Ameren UE ;
e. AT&T Telephone Company;
f. St. Louis County Medical Examiner's Office;
g. City of Olivette Public Works and Parks Supervisors;
h. If the disaster is due to a tornado, the National Weather Service must be notified
immediately;
i. If the disaster is due to a plane crash, the Federal Aviation Administration must be
notified immediately.
3. Any additional notifications will be made at the discretion and direction of Chief of Police.
4. Phone numbers for notifications, an outline for assignment of personnel, and information on
Emergency Operations Center locations and scene control are detailed in the City of Olivette
Emergency Operations Plan manual.
XVI. MUTUAL ASSISTANCE:
When notified by another department that they are in need of assistance, the dispatcher shall immediately
notify the shift commander, who shall ensure that this Department renders whatever assistance is
appropriate.
XVII. CODE 1000 and MOBILE RESPONSE TEAM:
The St. Louis Area Chiefs of Police Association has a disaster plan for sharing law enforcement
resources in the event of a large-scale disaster or civil unrest. This combined strength shall be available
to any participating agency which has exhausted its resources combating an emergency and that emer-
gency continues to exist. If CODE 1000 assistance request is received, the dispatcher will notify the shift
commander immediately.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 10 of 11 --

OPD – 36.1
Page 11 of 11
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/30/2009
Revised: 10/5/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 7/10/2020
Revised: 3/18/2024
Revised: 9/9/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 11 of 11 --

