OPD – 39.2
Page 1 of 10
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Domestic Violence
Stalking
Ex Parte Order of Protection
Full Order of Protection
Emergency Order of Protection
________________________________________________________________________
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines, responsibilities and
procedures for domestic violence intervention.
II. DEFINITIONS
A. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE – Abuse or stalking committed by family or household
member.
B. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE INCIDENT – Any incident involving parties in a domestic
relationship as defined under family/household member. Domestic violence incidents will
include but are not limited to: murder, manslaughter, assault, stalking, harassment, sexual
offenses, robbery, arson, property damage, peace disturbance and offenses against the
family (e.g., abandonment of a child, neglect, abuse, etc.)
C. FAMILY/HOUSEHOLD MEMBER – Spouses, former spouses, any person related by
blood or marriage, persons who are presently residing together or have resided together in
the past, any person who is or has been in a continuing social relationship of a romantic
or intimate nature with the victim, and anyone who has a child in common regardless of
whether they have been married or have resided together at any time.
D. DOMESTIC VICTIM – A household or family member as the term “family” or
“household member” is defined in section 455.010, including any child who is a member
of the household or family.

-- 1 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 2 of 10
E. ADULT - Any person 18 years of age or older or otherwise emancipated.
F. CHILD - A person under 18 years of age.
G. COURT - The circuit or associate circuit court of the state of Missouri.
H. ASSAULT - Purposely or knowingly placing or attempting to place another in fear of
physical harm.
I. SEXUAL ASSAULT - Causing or attempting to cause another to engage involuntarily
in any sexual act by force, threat of force, or duress.
J. CHILD ABUSE – Any physical injury, sexual abuse or emotional abuse inflicted on a
child other than by accidental means.
K. PRIMARY PHYSICAL AGGRESSOR - The most significant, rather than the first
aggressor.
L. UNLAWFUL IMPRISONMENT - Holding, confining, detaining or abducting another
person against those persons will.
M. COERCION - Compelling another by force or threat of force to engage in conduct
from which the latter has a right to abstain or to abstain from conduct in which the person
has a right to engage.
N. HARASSMENT - Engaging in a purposeful or knowing course of conduct involving
more than one incident that alarms or causes distress to an adult or child and serves no
legitimate purpose. The course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable
adult or child to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial
emotional distress to the petitioner or child. Such conduct might include but is not
limited to:
1. Following another about in a public place or places;
2. Peering in the window or lingering outside the residence of another; but does
not include constitutionally protected activity.
O. STALKING - When any person purposely engages in an unwanted course of conduct
that causes alarm to another person, or a person who resides together in the same
household with the person seeking the order of protection when it is reasonable in that
person's situation to have been alarmed by the conduct. As used in this subdivision,
“alarm” means to cause fear of danger of physical harm. “Course of Conduct” means a
pattern of conduct composed of two or more acts over a period of time, however short,
that serves no legitimate purpose. Such conduct may include, but is not limited to,
following the other person or unwanted communication or unwanted contact.

-- 2 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 3 of 10
Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of "course of
conduct".
P. PETITIONER – A family or household member who has been a victim of domestic
violence, or any person who has been the victim of stalking or sexual assault, or a person
filing on behalf of a child pursuant to section 455.503 who has filed a verified petition
pursuant to the provisions of section 455.020 or section 455.505.
Q. RESPONDENT - The family or household member alleged to have committed an act
of domestic violence, or person alleged to have committed an act of stalking or sexual
assault, against whom a verified petition has been filed or a person served on behalf of a
child pursuant to section 455.503.
III. PROCEDURE
The officers of this Department will apply the same standard for response to an alleged
incident of abuse as to like offenses involving strangers. Existence of any of the
following factors, but not limited to these factors, shall be interpreted as indicating a need
for immediate response per RSMo 455.080:
A. The caller indicates:
1. Violence is imminent or in progress;
2. An exparte or full order of protection is in effect;
3. The caller indicates that incidents of domestic violence have occurred
previously between the parties.
B. No employee of this Department investigating an incident of adult abuse will threaten
the arrest of all parties for the purpose of discouraging requests for law enforcement
intervention by any party.
C. When complaints are received from two or more opposing parties, the officer will
evaluate each complaint separately. If an arrest is necessary, the officer will attempt to
identify the party he/she believes is the primary aggressor and arrest that party.
1. The term “primary physical aggressor” is defined as the most significant, rather
than the first aggressor. The officer will consider any or all of the following in
determining the primary physical aggressor.
a. The intent of the law to protect victims of domestic violence from
continuing abuse.
b. The comparative extent of injuries inflicted or severe threats creating
fear of physical injury.

-- 3 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 4 of 10
c. The history of domestic violence between the persons involved.
D. When an officer has probable cause to believe that a party, against whom a protective
order has been entered and who has had notice of such order entered, has committed an
act of abuse in violation of such order, the officer will arrest the offending party—the
respondent. Refusal by the victim to prosecute will not prevent an arrest.
E. When a law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe a party has committed a
violation of law amounting to abuse, assault, or stalking as defined in Section 455.010
RSMo, against persons who are protected under the statute, the officer may arrest the
offending party.
F. When the officer declines to make an arrest pursuant to this law, the officer will
complete a CARE report, and a narrative report of the incident, describing not only the
facts and circumstances of this offense but also the reason why no arrest was made.
G. Any officer subsequently called to the same address within a twelve-hour period, who
will find probable cause to believe the same offender has again committed a violation as
stated against the same person or any other family or household member, will arrest the
offending party for this subsequent offense.
1. The report of the non-arrest in the proceeding twelve-hour period may be
considered as evidence of the defendant’s intent in the violation for which the
arrest occurred.
2. The refusal of the victim to prosecute will not prevent an arrest.
3. It will be the responsibility of the Watch Commander to ascertain the location
of any abuse calls that occurred during the previous twelve (12) hours and advise
his personnel.
H. The St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney’s Office has instituted guidelines for law
enforcement officers in dealing with domestic violence cases prior to a warrant being
issued.
1. Charges of Domestic Violence will be considered for incidents involving
individuals in any of the following relationships:
a. spouses
b. former spouses
c. any person related by blood or marriage
d. persons who are presently residing together or have resided together in
the past

-- 4 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 5 of 10
e. persons who are or have been in a continuing social relationship of a
romantic or intimate nature
f. anyone who has a child in common regardless of whether they have
been married or have resided together at any time
2. Incidents involving first-time offenders and/or minor assaults should be
considered for Olivette Municipal Court.
3. All corroborating witnesses, including children, will be interviewed and
statements placed in the narrative portion of the report.
a. Written statements should be obtained from all witnesses capable of
writing.
b. Officers should paraphrase in their narrative portion of the report what
the witnesses told them. Officers should not just say, “Witness X’s
statement corroborated the victim’s account of the incident”.
4. Names, addresses and phone numbers of all witnesses shall be obtained and
entered into the report. Attempt to obtain alternate contact for the victim (i.e.
mother’s telephone number, best friend’s telephone number, etc.)
5. A record check of the defendant shall be completed and attached to the report.
6. A copy of the 911 call or phone conversation of the reporting party shall be
made and brought to the prosecutor’s office.
7. List any medical treatment received by the victim or suspect. The report must
contain the name of the paramedic and ambulance service, their report numbers, if
any, and the name of the hospital to which the victim and/or suspect is taken, the
name of the treating doctor, the diagnosis, etc. Even if the victim refuses
transportation to the hospital, the report should list the paramedic’s name and the
ambulance service that responded to the scene. Also the report should indicate if
the victim was treated at the emergency room and released, or whether the victim
was admitted to the hospital. The Victim’s Authorization to Release Medical
Records, Departmental Form #OPD – F1083, should be signed by the victim at
the scene.
8. Reports of prior incidents of domestic violence by this suspect are to be
attached and presented at warrant application.
9. Copies of all orders of protection and proof of service are to be attached to the
report and presented at the warrant application.
10. Photographs of all injuries must be taken. If the suspect claims to be the
victim of an assault, he/she should be photographed as well.

-- 5 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 6 of 10
11. The age(s) and name(s) of all children should be documented. All children
must be interviewed for their accounts of the incident and for their knowledge of
any previous incidents. Describe any injuries sustained by the children and also
their emotional states (crying, catatonic, etc.). If the children are injured, the
officer must place a HOTLINE call to the Division of Family Services (800-392-
3738). The police report should note the name and/or identification number of the
HOTLINE operator.
12. The police report should include the victim’s demeanor and any spontaneous,
excited statements, or utterances, by the victim or suspect. These statements
must be presented in the report as quotations (Ex. “He hit me.”).
IV. VICTIM ASSISTANCE
Per RSMo 455.080, officers of this Department shall:
1. Inform the abused party of available judicial remedies for relief from adult
abuse and of available shelters for victims of domestic violence;
2. Officers will provide victims with a Departmental Domestic Violence Packet
that provides community resources and pamphlets related to adult abuse;
3. The officer will provide or arrange transportation for the abused party to a
medical facility for treatment of injuries or a place of shelter or safety, if desired.
V. ORDERS OF PROTECTION
A. Upon the filing of a verified petition under the Adult Abuse Statute for good cause
shown in the petition, the court may immediately issue an Ex Parte Order of Protection
that shall be in effect until the time of the hearing where a Full Order of Protection may
or may not be issued.
B. After the judge issues an Order of Protection, the court will enter the record into
MULES.
C. Once the Order of Protection is entered into law enforcement computer systems,
ECDC will receive a notification that an order has been entered.
D. ECDC will forward a copy of such orders to the Department’s Record Clerk who will
file the document in the Exparte/Order of Protection Book at this Command.
E. When an order is dismissed, terminated, or expired, the court will cancel it in MULES
and notify ECDC.
VI. AFTER HOURS ORDERS OF PROTECTION
A. To facilitate the issuance of an emergency Ex Parte Order of Protection during times

-- 6 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 7 of 10
that the Adult Abuse Office is closed, officers selected by the Chief of Police (or his
designee) will be deputized by the Circuit Clerk as Special Deputy Circuit Clerks for the
purpose of administering the oaths necessary to obtain Orders of Protection.
B. When the need for immediate protection exists, the victim will be directed to report to
the police station to file an application for an Ex Parte Order of Protection. If determined
necessary by a supervisor, transportation for the victim will be provided.
C. The St. Louis County Domestic Violence Council’s Law Enforcement Committee
suggests that an emergency is one of the following:
1. When, at the time of the petitioner’s request, more than 24 hours will elapse
before the Adult Abuse Office opens for regular business hours; or
2. When the alleged offender may be detained by the police but may be released
before the alleged victim can obtain relief during regular business hours; or
3. When the alleged offender has left the scene and there is legitimate concern
that he/she may return to the scene and commit further acts of domestic violence.
D. The deputized officer will provide the victim with the following forms, an instruction
sheet for their completion, and any assistance necessary:
1. Adult Abuse Petition for an Order of Protection
2. Family Court Filing Certificate
3. Service Information for Order of Protection
4. Financial Statement of Petitioner; and
5. Family Court Assignment Order.
E. The Adult Abuse Petition for Order of Protection and the Financial Statement of
Petitioner must be signed under oath administered by the deputized Police
Department representative.
F. When all forms have been completed, the deputized Police Department representative
will contact the Intake Department at Justice Services (615-2578) and alert them that a
petition is forthcoming by facsimile transmission (615-0179). On the fax transmitting
form, the officer should note whether or not the respondent is immediately available to
the officer for service.
G. The Intake Clerk will contact the duty judge and either read the allegations to the
judge and receive verbal authorization for issuance of an Ex Parte or fax the information
to the judge who may sign the order and fax it back.
H. If an Order of Protection is issued, the Intake Clerk will then assign a case number,

-- 7 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 8 of 10
court division number, and schedule a hearing date to the Ex Parte and fax it back to the
Police Department.
I. The deputized Police Department representative will then make four copies of the
signed order and distribute them as follows:
1. One for the petitioner;
2. One for service upon the respondent if available;
3. One for the return of service to the court; and
4. One retained for entering into MULES/REJIS.
J. The deputized Police Department representative will fax a copy of the order to ECDC
for entry into MULES/REJIS.
K. If the respondent is available to be served, the officer will present him/her with a copy
of the petition and Ex Parte only. If the respondent is served, the officer will immediately
transmit a copy of the exparte and executed Officer’s Return of Service by facsimile to
the Adult Abuse Office of the Circuit Clerk (314-615-2536 Fax).
L. All original documents obtained by this Department in accordance with this procedure
shall be sent by mail to the court by the police officer administering the oath at:
Adult Abuse Office of the St. Louis County Clerk
105 S. Central Avenue
Clayton, MO 63105
VII. FOREIGN (OUT OF STATE) ORDER OF PROTECTION
A. Any protection order issued by any other state, territory, or possession of the United
States is valid and enforceable in the state of Missouri so long as it is in effect in the
issuing state.
B. Officers should advise holders of foreign orders (out of state) of protection that
pursuant to Missouri Statute, they may file a petition to register their order with the
Missouri Circuit Court.
C. Officers will refer holders of foreign orders (out of state) of protection to the Adult
Abuse Office of the Circuit Clerk for assistance in obtaining registration of their orders.
VIII. OTHER PROVISIONS
A. The existing law requiring law enforcement agencies to report to the Missouri State
Highway Patrol any domestic violence homicides has been expanded to include domestic
violence-related suicides as defined in section 455.200 RSMo.

-- 8 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 9 of 10
1. In making the determination regarding domestic violence, law enforcement
officers are to consider if the relationship between the perpetrator and victim was
that of a family, household member, or dating relationship, whether either the
victim or the perpetrator previously filed for an Order of Protection and whether
any of the subjects involved in the incident previously had been investigated for
incidents of domestic violence.
B. The Missouri Department of Public Safety will collect uniform crime reports from all
law enforcement agencies, consistent with the national Uniform Crime Reporting system
operated by the FBI. This mandatory reporting system will collect uniform statistical
data on crime incidents and arrest reports. Law enforcement agencies that do not submit
crime incident reports may be deemed ineligible to receive state or federal funds.
IX. DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ASSAULT CRIMES
A. Domestic Assault in the First Degree (565.072 RSMo)
Class B Felony, unless serious physical injury results, then it becomes a Class A
Felony
A defendant commits the offense of domestic assault in the first degree if (s)he:
1. attempts to kill; or
2. knowingly causes or attempts to cause serious physical injury
3. to a domestic victim.
B. Domestic Assault in the Second Degree (565.073 RSMo)
Class D Felony
A defendant commits the offense of domestic assault in the second degree if
(s)he:
1. knowingly causes physical injury by any means; or
2. recklessly causes serious physical injury; or
3. recklessly causes physical injury by means of a deadly weapon.
C. Domestic Assault in the Third Degree (565.074 RSMo)
Class E Felony
A defendant commits the offense of domestic assault in the third degree if (s)he:
1. attempts to cause physical injury; or
2. knowingly causes physical pain or illness.
D. Domestic Assault in the Fourth Degree (565.076 RSMo)

-- 9 of 10 --

OPD – 39.2
Page 10 of 10
Class A Misdemeanor, unless the defendant is guilty of the assault of a domestic victim
2 or more times, then it becomes a Class E Felony
A defendant commits the offense of domestic assault in the fourth degree if (s)he:
1. attempts to cause or recklessly causes physical injury, physical pain, or
illness; or
2. with criminal negligence causes physical injury by means of a deadly
weapon or dangerous instrument; or
3. purposely places the victim in apprehension of immediate physical
injury by any means.
4. recklessly engages in conduct which creates a substantial risk of death
or serious physical injury; or
5. knowingly causes physical contact knowing the victim will regard the
contact as offensive; or
6. knowingly attempts to cause or causes the isolation of the victim by
unreasonable or substantially restricting or limiting his or her access to
other persons, telecommunications devices or transportation for the
purpose of isolation.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/13/2010
Revised: 7/22/2016
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 5/7/2018
Revised: 4/28/2020
Revised: 12/21/2021
Revised: 3/20/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 10 of 10 --

