OPD – 39.4
Page 1 of 11
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Bias Based Policing
Racial Profiling
________________________________________________________________________
BIAS BASED POLICING
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this directive is to define and elaborate on the scope and limits of law
enforcement authority as it pertains to the enforcement of laws, statues, ordinances and
arrests.
II. DEFINITIONS
A. CONTACT – a face-to-face communication between an officer and a private person
under circumstances where the person is free to leave.
B. FRISK – a frisk occurs when an officer makes contact with the outer clothing of a
person, using feel and/or pat down methods to detect whether a concealed weapon or
dangerous instrument is being carried.
C. PERSONALLY INVOLVED – where the off-duty officer, a family member, or a
friend becomes engaged in a dispute or incident with the person to be arrested or any
other person connected with the incident.
D. REASONABLE OFFICER – A reasonable officer can be defined as one who acts as
other similarly trained and experienced officers could be expected to act, under similar
circumstances. The reasonableness of officers’ actions will be reviewed based on the
facts and circumstances known to him at the time of the action.
E. REASONABLE ARTICULABLE SUSPICION – A police officer has reasonable
suspicion to detain a citizen briefly for purposes of investigation when the officer, in light
of experience and training, is aware of articulable facts or circumstances which could
lead a reasonable officer to believe that a crime has occurred, criminal activity is going to
occur, or someone is otherwise in need of police assistance.
F. REASONABLE SUSPICION TO FRISK – A police officer has reasonable suspicion
to frisk a citizen during an investigative detention when the officer is concerned for their

-- 1 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 2 of 11
personal safety and, in light of experience and training, is aware of articulable facts or
circumstances which could lead a reasonable officer to believe that the citizen may be
armed with a weapon.
G. STOP – A stop is a temporary detention of a person for investigation. A stop occurs
when officers use their authority either to compel a person to halt, to remain in a certain
place, or to perform some act (such as walking to a nearby location where the officer can
use a radio, telephone, etc.) Both pedestrians and persons in vehicles may be stopped.
This General Order prohibits the practice of routinely stopping members of minority
groups for violations of vehicle laws as a pretext for investigating other violations of
criminal law.
H. MINORITY BASED ENFORCEMENT ACTION – Actions taken on part of the
officer which are based on race, national origin, creed, color, disability, age, religion,
gender, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression, socio-economic status or any
other class protected by law. This General Order prohibits the practice of making
enforcement action decisions based on race, national origin, creed, color, disability, age,
religion, gender, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression, socio-economic status
or any other class protected by law.
III. POLICY
It is the policy of this Department to investigate suspicious persons, incidents and other
activities, which officers encounter on patrol. It is also the intent of the Department to
respect and protect the constitutional rights of all individuals during law enforcement
contacts and/or enforcement actions. The Department encourages its officers to initiate
citizen contacts to stay informed about activities and concerns of persons in the
community.
IV. GUIDELINES
A. For purposes beyond a mere contact, officers should realize that they must be within
their jurisdiction or have a statutory authority.
B. For purposes beyond a mere contact, non-uniformed officers will identify themselves
if circumstances require.
C. Officers shall not inquire about intimate details of the person’s sexual practices,
genitals, anatomy or medical history, or conduct a search to determine a person’s
anatomy or assign gender.
D. Officers shall not use language that is demeaning or derogatory to another person, in
particular, language aimed at a person’s actual or perceived race, national origin, creed,
color, disability, age, religion, gender, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression or
socio-economic status.

-- 2 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 3 of 11
E. Officers shall address the public using names, pronouns and titles of respect
appropriate to the individual’s gender identity as expressed by the individual (e.g. “she,
her” for an individual who requests she/her pronouns; “he, his” for an individual who
requests he/his pronouns; “they, them” for an individual who requests “they/them”
pronouns).
V. CITIZEN ENCOUNTERS
A. Contacts
1. Officers are encouraged to initiate contacts with individuals in the community
in order to gain knowledge of their patrol districts and the community.
2. A contact is different from a detention or arrest in that it does not involve the
seizure of a person within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. The officer
does not need reasonable suspicion, probable cause, or any other specific display
of criminal activity in order to initiate a contact.
3. Officers may feel the need to investigate the activities of a person when they do
not possess sufficient information to make a stop or arrest. In such a case, the
officer may initiate a contact with the person in any place that the officer has the
right to be.
4. Unless an officer concludes that an arrest should be made or that a stop is
justifiable and appropriate, communications with a private person should begin
with a contact.
5. Although no legal cause need be present for the officer to initiate a contact, the
persons contacted may not be halted, detained, or frisked against their will. They
may not be required to cooperate; they must be permitted to go on their way
unless the officer has developed reasonable suspicion to escalate the contact to a
stop or has developed probable cause. Since a contact is not a stop or an arrest,
those persons contacted may be innocent of any wrongdoing; officers should take
special care to act in a restrained and courteous manner.
6. Contacts shall be logged in the electronic “Field Contact Log” to include Date
and Time; Officer’s DSN; How Contact Was Initiated; Name, Age, Race, and Sex
of the Contact; and the CAD or Report Number.
B. Stops
1. If an officer reasonably suspects that a person has committed, is committing, or
is about to commit any crime, the authority to stop that person exists. The officer
may exercise this authority in any place that the officer has the right to be. Both
pedestrians and persons in vehicles may be stopped. A stop is warranted if there is
a reasonable suspicion by the officer that some activity out of the ordinary is or

-- 3 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 4 of 11
has occurred, some indication to connect the person under suspicion with the
unusual activity, and some suggestion that the activity is related to a crime.
2. Factors to consider in determining whether reasonable suspicion exits for a
stop.
a. Appearance – Does the person generally fit the description of a person
wanted for a known offense? Do they appear to be suffering from a recent
injury or to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other intoxicants?
b. Actions – Is the person running away from an actual or possible crime
scene? Are they behaving in a manner indicating possible criminal
conduct? If so, in what way? Were incriminating statements or
conversations overheard?
c. Demeanor – Is the person responsive to questions during the contact;
were their answers evasive, suspicious, or incriminating? Were they
excessively nervous during the contact?
d. Officer’s Prior Knowledge – Does the person have a prior arrest or
conviction record, or are they known to have committed a serious offense?
If so, is it for offenses similar to one that has just occurred, or which you
suspect is about to occur?
e. Area – is the person near the location of a known offense soon after its
commission? Is the person in an area known for usually high incidence of
a particular criminal activity? If so, is it the kind of activity the person is
thought to have committed, be committing, or is about to commit? If
reference is made to the area of the stop, officers should be able to
articulate specific facts concerning that area (i.e., four commercial
burglaries during the past week and within several blocks of the stop).
f. Time of Day – is it usual for people to be in the area at this particular
time? Is it the time of day or night during which criminal activity of the
kind suspected usually occurs?
g. Prior Police Training and Experience – does the person’s conduct
resemble the pattern of modus operandi used in particular criminal
offenses? Does the investigating officer have experience in dealing with
the particular kind of criminal activity being investigated?
h. Police Purpose – was the officer investigating a specific crime or
specific type of criminal activity? Might innocent people be endangered if
investigative action is not taken at once?

-- 4 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 5 of 11
i. Source of Information – if the basis of the officer’s reasonable suspicion
is, in whole or in part, information supplied by another person, what kind
of person was involved? Were they a criminal informant, a witness, or a
victim of a crime? How reliable does the person appear to be? Have they
supplied information in the past that proved to be reliable? Are they
known to the officer? Did the officer obtain the information directly from
that person? How did the person obtain the information? Was any part of
the information corroborated prior to making the stop?
3. Every officer who conducts a stop, as opposed to a contact, must be prepared to
cite those specific factors which led the officer to believe that the stop was
justifiable.
4. Proper justification for a stop does not permit unreasonable conduct during the
stop. All police activity during a stop must be done in a reasonable manner
because each phase of the stop will be considered by the courts in determining
whether the stop was reasonable and, therefore, lawful. Vehicle and other stops
will not be based solely on race, national origin, creed, color, disability, age,
religion, gender, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression, socio-economic
status or any other class protected by law; unless the officer is seeking an
individual with one or more of those identified attributes.
a. A person stopped pursuant to this Directive may only be detained at or
near the scene of the stop for a reasonable length of time. Officers should
detain a person only for the length of time necessary to obtain or verify the
person’s presence or conduct, or an account of the offense, or otherwise
determine if the person should be arrested or released.
b. Officers must act with as much restraint and courtesy towards the
person stopped as is possible under the circumstances. Non- uniformed
officers making a stop shall identify themselves as law enforcement
officers as soon as practical after making the stop. Prior to termination of
the stop, the officer shall give the person stopped an explanation of the
purpose of the stop.
c. Officers may direct questions to the detained person(s) for the purpose
of obtaining their name, address, and an explanation of their presence and
conduct. However, absent probable cause for an arrest, the detained person
may not be compelled to answer those questions (even that of identity)
except as required or mandated by applicable state law.
d. Refusal to answer questions does not by itself establish probable cause
to arrest, but such refusal may be considered along with other facts as a
factor to be considered in determining whether the investigation should be
continued.

-- 5 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 6 of 11
e. Officers shall use the least compelling means necessary under the
circumstances to affect the stop of a person. The compelling means may
be a verbal request, an order, or the use of a physical response to
resistance or aggression. If circumstances exist to create probable cause to
arrest, the officer may use the amount of response reasonable and
justifiable to affect a full custody arrest. The officer may use that amount
of response reasonable and justifiable for self-defense.
f. Each officer, upon stopping an individual (though not in the act of
conducting a traffic stop) shall record the Contact’s information in the
electronic “Field Contact Log” to include Date and Time; Officer’s DSN;
How Contact Was Initiated; Name, Age, Race, and Sex of the Contact;
and the CAD or Report Number.
g. Each officer, upon stopping a vehicle, will complete documentation
containing the following information;
i. The age, gender, race or minority group, and resident status of
the driver stopped;
ii. The traffic violation or violations committed, which led to the
stop;
iii. Whether a search was conducted as a result of the stop;
iv. If a search of the person, their property or vehicle is conducted,
the officer shall document probable cause and the duration of the
search;
v. The searching officer(s) shall document any contraband or
evidence found during the search;
vi. Warnings or citations issued as a result of the stop;
vii. Any arrests resulting from the stop or search, to include
charges;
viii. The location of the stop.
C. Frisks
1. An officer may frisk any person who has been stopped when the officer
reasonably suspects that the person is carrying a concealed weapon or dangerous
instrument. The frisk may be conducted immediately upon making the stop or at
any time during the stop whenever a reasonable suspicion to frisk develops.

-- 6 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 7 of 11
During traffic stops the officer may frisk both the driver and any passengers if the
above conditions are met.
2. Reasonable suspicion for a valid frisk is more than a vague hunch and less than
probable cause. If a reasonably prudent officer, under the circumstances, would
believe the officer’s safety or that of other persons in the vicinity is in danger,
because a particular person might be carrying a weapon or dangerous instrument,
a frisk is justified.
a. Appearance – Do the cloths bulge in a manner suggesting the presence
of any object capable of inflicting injury?
b. Actions – Did the person make movements as if to hide a weapon when
they were approached? Are they nervous during the course of the
detention? Are their words or actions threatening?
c. Prior Knowledge – Does the officer know the person to have a record
for weapons offenses or prior assaults? Does the officer know if the person
has a reputation for carrying weapons?
d. Location – Is the area sufficiently isolated so that the officer is unlikely
to receive immediate aid if attacked?
e. Time of Day – Is the confrontation taking place at night? Does this
contribute to the likelihood that the officer will be attacked?
f. Police Purpose – Does the officer’s suspicion of the suspect relate to a
serious and violent offense? An armed offense? (if so, those same
suspicions justifying the stop also justify the frisk).
g. Companions – Has the officer detained a number of people at the same
time? Has a frisk of a companion to the suspect revealed a weapon? Does
the officer have assistance immediately available to handle the number of
persons stopped?
4. A frisk is a limited search for the purpose of protection only. Reasonable
suspicion to frisk does not permit a full-scale search.
5. General conduct of a frisk:
a. Items in possession of the subject to be frisked (i.e., purses, shopping
bags, or briefcases) should be taken from the person. The object may then
be inspected visually and by pat down of the exterior. If there is further
cause to believe the object contains a weapon, then the officer may look
inside.

-- 7 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 8 of 11
b. Prior to beginning the frisk, the officer should advise the person that
they are going to conduct a frisk. The frisk should begin in those parts of
the clothing most likely to contain a weapon or dangerous instrument.
c. Frisks are a limited pat down of the person’s outer clothing unless:
i. The outer clothing is too bulky to determine if a weapon is
concealed underneath. In this case the outer clothing may be
opened.
ii. The officer has a reasonable belief, based upon reliable
information or knowledge and observations, that a weapon or
dangerous instrument is concealed at a particular location on the
person, such as a pocket, waste band, or sleeve. If so, the officer
may reach directly into the suspect area. (Note: the officer must be
able to explain the precise factors leading to the exception,)
d. The officer may also frisk or secure any areas within the detained
person’s immediate reach, if the officer reasonably suspects that such
areas might contain a weapon or dangerous instrument.
6. When an officer conducting a frisk, feels an object which the officer reasonably
believes is a weapon or dangerous instrument or may contain such an item, the
officer may reach into the area and remove the object.
a. Weapons or dangerous instruments – Determine if the person’s
possession of the instrument is licensed or otherwise legal, or if it is
unlawful. If the instrument is legally possessed, it should be secured away
from the person’s location for the duration of the detention. If a weapon,
dangerous instrument, contraband or seizable items are discovered by the
officer and the possession is unlawful, then appropriate search and/or
arrest procedures should be followed.
b. Contraband or seizable items – The officer may seize and consider it in
determining if probable cause exists to arrest the person. (If the person is
arrested, then a full custodial search is proper.)
c. An object which could reasonably contain a weapon or dangerous
instrument – with reasonable suspicion the officer may look inside the
container and briefly examine its contents. If a weapon, dangerous
instrument, contraband or seizable items are discovered by the officer and
the possession is unlawful, then appropriate search and/or arrest
procedures should be followed. If none of the above is located, return the
object to the person.

-- 8 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 9 of 11
d. If a container could not reasonably contain a weapon or dangerous
instrument, or the officer does not have a reasonable belief that it contains
such an item, then the officer may not look inside it. The item should then
be returned to the owner.
7. If removal of the suspected object simultaneously discloses a second object
that itself is a seizable item, the officer may lawfully seize the second object. The
second object should then be considered in determining whether probable cause
exists to arrest the person. If so, the officer should tell the person they are under
arrest and proceed with a full custodial search incidental to the arrest.
8. Under the “Plain Feel Doctrine”, an officer may take reasonable steps to
examine an object or article if, while conducting a frisk:
a. the officer feels an object which the officer does not believe to be a
weapon or dangerous instrument, but
b. does believe to be contraband, based upon
i. The properties of the object determined by “plain feel” through
the subject’s clothing (such as size, shape, or consistency); and
ii. The officer’s experience and the totality of the current incident.
iii. Upon confirmation that the object or article is an illegal object,
the officer may appropriately seize the object, and arrest and
charge the suspect.
VI. COMPLIANCE
A. The Olivette Police Department prohibits any unlawful or improper bias in public
safety. Violations of this policy will be monitored through monthly reports, complaints
by citizens, and conduct or patterns observed by a supervisor or discovered by Command
staff. Violations of this policy, or portions thereof, will result in disciplinary action.
B. The Bureau of Support Services Commander will review quarterly data for all
officer’s traffic stop contacts and logged field contacts. Officers who are 40% or more
above the Department average of combined total contacts of any given race during any
quarter will receive a review of (5) randomly chosen traffic stop contacts and/or field
contacts. A determination will be made whether there were any evident bias-based
policing decisions and/or policy violations made. The result of the review will be
forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.
C. If an officer is determined to have made unlawful or improper bias-based policing
decisions and/or policy violations, the findings will be discussed with the officer by the
officer’s supervisors and the Deputy Chief. An entry will be made in Guardian Tracking

-- 9 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 10 of 11
to document the discussion and the need for any additional biased based policing training
and/or any disciplinary action taken. Any officer’s contact reviews which establish a
pattern of unlawful or improper bias-based policing and/or policy violations may lead to
further disciplinary action up to and including termination.
VII. OFFICERS ASSIGNED TO OTHER AGENCIES
Officers of this Department assigned to or assisting other law enforcement agencies will
be guided by this policy.
VIII. ANNUAL REVIEW
The Chief of Police, in conjunction with Command Staff, will conduct a documented
annual administrative review of agency activities with potential for bias to include, but
not limited to, traffic and field contacts, asset forfeiture efforts, citizen complaints and
any corrective measures taken.
IX. APPLICATION
This Order constitutes Department policy and is not intended to enlarge the employees’
civil or criminal liability in any way. It should not be construed as the creation of a higher
legal standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with respect to third party claims
insofar as the employee’s legal duty as imposed by law.
X. TRAINING
A. This Department will provide documented initial training in biased issues, including
legal aspects, for all affected personnel, prior to, or at least within 60 days of, assignment.
B. This Department will provide documented in-service training in biased issues,
including legal aspects, for all affected personnel annually. Additional remedial training
may be assigned to personnel as deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.
C. A documented annual review of the Department’s General Order related to unlawful
or improper bias in public safety will be completed annually by all affected personnel.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 06/30/2009
Revised: 5/3/2018
Revised: 5/29/2020

-- 10 of 11 --

OPD – 39.4
Page 11 of 11
Revised: 7/7/2020
Revised: 5/28/2021
Revised: 6/17/2021
Revised: 12/21/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 5/20/2024
Revised: 9/9/2024
Revised: 6/4/2025
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 11 of 11 --

