OPD - 5.1
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Department Organization
Bureau of Field Operations
Bureau of Investigations
Bureau of Support Services
Office of the Chief of Police
Police Chaplains
Police Records
Administrative Services
DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to establish the organizational structure within the
Department.
II. STRUCTURE
POSITION RANK
Chief of Police Colonel
Deputy Chief Major
Bureau of Investigations Commander Lieutenant or Sergeant
Bureau of Support Services Commander Lieutenant
Patrol Commander Lieutenant
Patrol Supervisor Sergeant or Corporal
Patrol/Community Engagement/Detective Police Officer
Police Records Technician Civilian

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD - 5.1
Page 2 of 4
III. DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION:
A. The Department is organized into three (3) major bureaus. Bureau Commanders may
issue rules, regulations, and guidelines for their respective bureaus to implement the
policies of the Chief of Police.
1. Bureau of Field Operations: The Bureau of Field Operations is commanded by
two (2) Lieutenants. The bureau consists of four (4) squads of one (1) Lieutenant,
one (1) Corporal, and two (2) Patrol Officers or one (1) Sergeant, one (1)
Corporal, and two (2) Patrol Officers. Unless otherwise directed by the Chief of
Police, seniority will dictate who commands a squad when supervisors of the
same rank are working. The Bureau of Field Operations is responsible for the
systematic patrol of the city, for the prevention and suppression of crime, the
arrest of law violators, the protection of life and property, the preservation of
peace, the enforcement of traffic laws and ordinances, the development and
implementation of community policing outreach and collaboration programs and
to perform other such duties as may be assigned by the Chief of Police.
2. Bureau of Investigations: The Bureau of Investigations is commanded by a
Lieutenant or Sergeant. The Bureau includes the Criminal Investigation Unit, as
well as Juvenile operations. The Bureau is responsible for investigation of
criminal activities, safekeeping of property and evidence, pre-employment
background investigation, liquor license investigations, special investigations,
internal affairs investigations, and other duties as may be assigned by the Chief of
Police. The detectives in this Unit will also act as Bailiff and court security for
the City’s Court proceedings.
3. Bureau of Support Services: The Bureau of Support Services is commanded by
a Lieutenant. The Bureau is responsible for Departmental policy development,
strategic planning, oversight of the CALEA Accreditation process, emergency
management functions, internal affairs investigations, and other duties as may be
assigned by the Chief of Police. This bureau also contains the functions of the
Community Engagement Officer assignment and Police Records Technician.
B. Office of the Chief of Police:
1. The Deputy Chief is the commander of Department operations and reports
directly to the Chief of Police.
The Deputy Chief also serves as the Inspector of Police, and as such, is
responsible for ensuring the objective and comprehensive investigation, reporting,
and maintenance of records of allegations of misconduct by Department
employees. The Deputy Chief reports all internal affairs matters directly to the
Chief of Police.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD - 5.1
Page 3 of 4
2. Police Chaplains are appointed by the Chief of Police. The Chaplains will
represent various faiths, when possible, and will be available to offer spiritual
guidance and support to employees, their families, and citizens of the community.
3. Fleet Maintenance
4. Computer Systems
5. Other support services as may be assigned by the Chief of Police
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective date: 02/06/2009
Revised: 5/23/2016
Revised: 2/22/2018.
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 4/14/2023
Revised: 9/5/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD - 5.1
Page 4 of 4

-- 4 of 4 --

