OPD - 5.3
Page 1 of 9
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Assistant to the Prosecuting Attorney
Bureau of Investigations Commander
Bureau of Support Services Commander
Chief of Police
Deputy Chief
Detective
Job Descriptions
Patrol Commander
Patrol Supervisor
Police Officer
Records Technician
________________________________________________________________________
PERSONNEL RESPONSIBILITIES
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to identify responsibilities for each position in the
Department as well as specific job responsibilities for each employee within the various
components of the Agency.
II. PROCEDURE
A. Job Classification
The Police Department shall comply with the City of Olivette Classification of Positions
Plan. This plan is based upon comprehensive studies and analysis of performance,
requirements, needed qualifications, education, training and experience for each position,
and the grouping of like positions into classes for assignment and compensation

-- 1 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 2 of 9
purposes. The plan permits common position description for each, avoiding separate job
requirements for recruitment, examination, selection, appointment, and promotion.
B. Responsibilities and Authority of an Olivette Police Officer:
1. Full time, permanent employee of the City of Olivette;
2. Powers of arrest with and without warrant as defined by state law;
3. Power to enforce federal, state and local ordinances within defined jurisdiction;
4. Power to execute arrest and search warrants as provided by law;
5. Power to conduct criminal investigations within the constraints provided by law
and the directives of this Department;
6. Must comply with all City of Olivette ordinances, statutes, Personnel Rules and
Regulations, Department Directives and lawful orders of ranking officers;
7. Must perform all job requirements as defined by job description; and
8. Must meet all certification and training requirements defined by the State of
Missouri, Department of Public Safety, Peace Officer Standards and Training
Commission.
C. Written job descriptions, describing requirements and qualifications, shall be reviewed
at least every four years and distributed to all personnel.
III. CLASSIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF DUTIES AND RESPONSBILITES
A. Chief of Police
1. Responsible for the overall development and management of staff including:
hiring, orientation, training, scheduling, evaluation and termination;
2. Prepares budget, monitors that work activities and purchases are within budget
and prepares related documents;
3. Develops and determines administrative policies, regulatory actions and capital
purchases;
4. Ensures proactive and responsive equipment maintenance and facilities
maintenance;
5. Monitors and ensures the safety of the work group;
6. Develops and determines long-range plans and goals;

-- 2 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 3 of 9
7. Reviews and responds to customer/resident inquiries, concerns and complaints;
8. Interacts with community groups and leaders on a regular basis to ensure open
lines of communication and to discuss police values, objectives and
achievements;
9. Monitors the Department work units to ensure they are performing in the most
effective and efficient manner;
10. Uses innovative approach and problem-solving techniques to overcome
obstacles in providing Municipal Police Services to the community;
11. Informs City Manager of actions and recommendations regarding police
activities;
12. Communicates effectively with the City Manager, Mayor, City Council and
citizen groups;
13. Serves as liaison by coordinating activities with other departments, other
criminal justice agencies and other agencies, boards and committees as needed;
14. Ensures that a formal written directives system is maintained;
15. Ensures enforcement, investigative and record support activities meet the
needs of the Olivette community and policing as a public service philosophy;
16. Ensures cooperation with other law enforcement agencies in the apprehension
of wanted persons;
17. Develops programs that increase the community's understanding of the
activities and role of the police and addresses civic groups on public safety
matters;
18. Develops emergency/disaster preparedness plans and preparation; and
19. Performs other work as assigned.
B. Deputy Chief
1. Provides general supervision of staff including: hiring, orientation, training,
scheduling, evaluation and termination;
2. Assists in budget preparation, monitors that work activities and purchases are
within budget and prepare related documents;

-- 3 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 4 of 9
3. Assists in developing and determining administrative policies, regulatory
actions and capital purchases;
4. Reviews and responds to customer/resident inquiries, concerns and complaints;
5. Directs the activities of Department bureaus and units to ensure efficient,
flexible, and responsive policing;
6. Collects, compiles and maintains records, reports and files while confirming
they are in accordance with Department procedures;
7. Utilizes the Department’s field forces and support personnel in a flexible and
responsive manner in keeping with the philosophy of policing as a public service;
8. Researches new approaches to providing police services, recommend methods
for improvement, and implement those methods that are approved. The Deputy
Chief is responsible for Support Services which includes the CALEA
Accreditation;
9. Ensures coordination and continuity in personnel administration and staffing;
10. Ensures all police incident and management information reports and case
management systems follow the City’s policy, specifications and ordinances; and
11. Performs other work as assigned.
C. Patrol Commander – Lieutenant
1. Supervises schedules and evaluates personnel and activities of their command
to ensure efficient, flexible and responsive policing;
2. Directs, monitors and personally participates in the training of personnel;
3. Develops, recommends and implements approved Department policy,
schedules, actions, new policing methods and capital purchases;
4. Collects, compiles and maintains records, reports and files while confirming
they are in accordance with Department procedures;
5. Ensures coordination and continuity in shift administration;
6. Monitors budget and expenditures and ensures activities are within budget;
7. Ensures administrative reports and case management systems follow the City's
codes, specifications and ordinances; and

-- 4 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 5 of 9
8. Performs other work as assigned.
D. Bureau of Investigations Commander – Lieutenant or Sergeant
1. The Commander of the Bureau of Investigations is responsible for the
supervision of personnel assigned to the Detective Bureau. The Commander
functions as a level of quality control for all reports from both uniform officers
and detectives. The Commander provides direction and feedback to detectives
and patrol officers of this Department. The Commander is responsible for
coordinating and directing all major crime scenes within the City of Olivette;
2. Investigates major and minor crimes, interrogates suspects and witnesses; takes
statements, compiles evidence and prepares cases for court, and gives testimony
relating to such cases as required;
3. Specific duties include the gathering of criminal intelligence and conducting
criminal investigations. The Bureau of Investigations is also responsible for
conducting pre-employment investigations on Department applicants. Further
duties include issuing oral and written orders to direct Bureau activities;
4. Investigations of both internal and external complaints against Department
personnel will be handled by the Bureau of Investigations unless the Chief of
Police feels the need for an outside agency to conduct an investigation due to a
conflict of interest;
5. The Commander functions as the liaison with other law enforcement agencies,
professional groups and the business community;
6. Investigates vice complaints, inspects various establishments to detect
gambling, prostitution and other violations of the law, and to prevent crimes;
7. Assists in finding persons wanted and the recovery of stolen property;
8. Investigates and reports accidents and incidents as required;
9. Advises and assists superiors and other police officers on all phases of
investigations;
10. Reports or accompanies persons to police headquarters to be booked on
charges and maintains custody of prisoners when necessary;
11. The Commander is responsible for planning and directing the activities of
other investigators, staffing, scheduling, and training of the criminal investigation
division;

-- 5 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 6 of 9
12. The Commander is responsible for submitting budget proposals, overseeing,
purchasing, managing and allocating of resources;
13. Responsibility for the security of the Municipal Court; and
14. Performs other work as assigned.
E. Bureau of Support Services Commander - Lieutenant
1. Maintains the Department’s CALEA Accreditation process
2. Develops, drafts, recommends and implements Department-approved policies,
actions, new policing methods and budgetary expenses.
3. Investigates or assists the Bureau of Investigations with internal affairs
complaints
4. Reviews the City’s Emergency Operations Plan in conjunction with the Deputy
Chief.
5. Coordinates the planning, organization, control and implementation of local
emergency management activities.
6. Conducts public presentations on Department-related activities or various law
enforcement topics.
7. Assists the Deputy Chief with budget preparation and presentation to the City
Manager.
8. Supervises the daily duties and administrative functions of the Records
Division and Community Engagement Officer assignment.
9. Performs other work as assigned.
F. Patrol Supervisor – Sergeant or Corporal
1. Plans, supervises and personally participates in police patrol and traffic control;
2. Assures that all officers are properly dressed and equipped, and that all patrol
cars are properly assigned;
3. Inspects all police equipment to assure that it is functional;
4. Makes routine patrols and provides backup support for all officers in the field;
5. Makes follow-up contacts with the public;

-- 6 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 7 of 9
6. Provides emergency assistance to the injured;
7. Assists/ensures conviction of unlawful behavior through enforcement,
investigative and court support activities;
8. Responds and actively takes charge of serious, unusual and/or critical
situations;
9. Collects, compiles and maintains records, reports and files while confirming
they are in accordance with Department procedures;
10. Acts for Police Lieutenant in his/her absence;
11. Addresses civic groups on police and safety matters; and
12. Performs other work as assigned.
G. Police Officer – Bureau of Field Operations
1. Responds to routine, urgent and emergency calls for service;
2. Performs preventive patrol and actively enforces laws, statutes and ordinances;
3. Identifies potential and actual police hazards and determines appropriate
response or enforcement activity;
4. Provides emergency assistance to the injured;
5. Protects accident and/or crime scenes to ensure evidence control;
6. Directs and controls traffic to ensure safe and efficient movement of vehicles
and pedestrians;
7. Conducts preliminary investigations of suspicious and/or criminal
activities/persons;
8. Conducts traffic enforcement activities to reduce accidents and discourage
unlawful driving behavior;
9. Pursues, apprehends, transports and controls criminals or other persons
menacing the public safety;
10. Assists/ensures conviction of unlawful behavior through enforcement,
investigative and court support activities;

-- 7 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 8 of 9
11. Prepares varied case, complaint and shift records and reports; and
12. Performs other work as assigned.
H. Detective (Police Officer) – Bureau of Investigations
1. Investigates major and minor crimes, interrogates suspects and witnesses; takes
statements, compiles evidence and prepares cases for court, and gives testimony
relating to such cases as required;
2. Investigates vice complaints, inspects various establishments to detect
gambling, prostitution and other violations of the law, and to prevent crimes;
3. Assists in finding persons wanted and the recovery of stolen property;
4. Investigates and reports accidents and incidents as required;
5. Advises and assists superiors and other police officers on all phases of detective
work;
6. Reports or accompanies persons to police headquarters to be booked on charges
and maintains custody of prisoners when necessary; and
7. Performs other work as assigned.
I. Police Records Technician – Civilian Position
1. Maintains files for incident reports, traffic accident reports, and arrest records,
missing persons, runaway juveniles, inactive warrants, and towed vehicles;
2. Prepares correspondence, transcribes reports, verifies and enters data into
automated records system;
3. Acts as Department receptionist and maintains visitor control log and passes;
All non-City personnel and subjects not in custody must complete the
Visitor Log and obtain a pass when being escorted into the Police
Department. This does not apply to law enforcement personnel.
4. Checks various record systems and forwards information to proper agencies
within guidelines;
5. Releases information in compliance with Missouri Sunshine Law;
6 Assists the Municipal Prosecuting Attorney; and

-- 8 of 9 --

OPD - 5.3
Page 9 of 9
7. Performs other work as assigned.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective date: 1/11/2010
Revised: 10/4/2010
Revised: 7/29/2016
Revised: 2/22/2018
Revised: 8/2/2018
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 11/3/2023
Revised: 9/5/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 9 of 9 --

