OPD - 6.1
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Written Directive System
General Orders Manual
Special Orders
Emergency Special Orders
Memorandums
Training Bulletins
Preparation of Orders
Command and Unit Orders
Review and Revision of Directives, Policies and Procedures
Dissemination and Storage of Department Directives
WRITTEN DIRECTIVE SYSTEM
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this General Order is to define the several types of written
communications to be used within the organizational structure of the Department. The
order also establishes the procedures to be followed when revising or updating
Department manuals.
II POLICY:
A. It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to have in place a formal written
directive system that defines standard operating procedures and provides employees with
a clear understanding of operating constraints and organizational expectations.

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 2 of 7
B. This policy statement expresses the authority for the Chief of Police to:
1. Issue written directives
2. Modify written directives
3. Approve written directives
C. The Chief of Police will issue all Rules, Regulations, Special Orders and Emergency
Special Orders.
III. DEFINITIONS:
A. COMMAND ORDER - A command, assignment, or direct order given by a shift
commander whereby a single component or person is affected
(i.e. change of patrol riding assignment).
B. INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIAL – Training guides, bulletins, and checklists.
C. MANUAL – A collection of policies, procedures, rules and regulations and/or other
written directives.
D. MEMORANDUM – An informal written document that may or may not convey an
order; it is generally used to clarify, inform, or inquire. May be an email document.
E. POLICY – A written directive that is a broad statement of Department principles.
Policy statements may be characterized by such words as “may” or “should” and usually
do not establish fixed rules or set procedures for conduct of an activity, but rather provide
a framework for development of procedures and rules and regulations.
F. PROCEDURE – A written directive that is a guideline for carrying out Department
activities. Procedures sometimes allow some latitude and discretion in carrying out an
activity.
G. RULES AND REGULATIONS – A set of specific guidelines to which all employees
must adhere. Also known as General Orders.
H. UNIT ORDER – A direct order or assignment given by a supervisor that affects more
than one person or component.
I. WRITTEN DIRECTIVE – Any written document used to guide or affect the
performance or conduct of Department employees. The term includes policies,
procedures, rules and regulations, general orders, special orders, memorandums, and
instructional material.

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 3 of 7
J. PowerDMS – An electronic document management system maintained for
dissemination and safekeeping of certain departmental written directives.
IV. GENERAL ORDERS MANUAL:
A. The Department will maintain an electronic manual of current policies and procedures
that will provide employees with a clear understanding of the constraints and
expectations relating to the performance of their duties. The directives will be reviewed
annually for relevancy, modifications, cancellations, or revisions.
B. The General Orders manual will contain at least the following:
1. Statements of Department Policy – The General Orders manual, as adopted
and approved by the Chief of Police, shall contain policies governing the Rules
and Regulations for the administration and discipline of the Olivette Police
Department.
2. Orders to the Department – The Chief of Police shall issue Rules, Regulations,
General Orders and Special Orders to the Department and he/she may also issue
such other orders, written or verbal, which are not inconsistent with the law or
with those rules.
C. Titles of Orders – All orders amending the General Orders of the Olivette Police
Department shall be issued as Orders of the Chief of Police under appropriate
classifications.
D. Classification of Orders
1. Orders of the Chief of Police shall be issued as Rules, Regulations, General
Orders, Special Orders, and Emergency Special Orders.
2. A complete set of all Rules, Regulations, General Orders, Special Orders, and
Emergency Special Orders, shall be kept by the Office of the Chief of Police,
regardless of their expiration or cancellation dates.
E. Rules and Regulations or General Orders will consist of the following:
1. Institution of permanent procedures, rules, regulations, policies, and manuals
related thereto.
2. Permanent changes in the organization.
3. Installation of permanent programs which affect more than one unit
subordinate to the issuing authority.
4. Use of equipment and expenditure of funds.

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 4 of 7
5. Permanent personnel policies and procedures including recruiting, hiring,
training and promotion, etc.
V. SPECIAL ORDERS:
Orders on specific procedures, policies or police details which are supplementary to the
General Orders shall be published as Special Orders. Self-canceling Special Orders shall
have an effective cancellation date.
VI. EMERGENCY SPECIAL ORDERS:
Urgent orders which may be necessary for the immediate mobilization of the Department
for an unusual emergency, or special orders that require immediate transmission to the
Department, shall be issued by the Chief of Police as Emergency Special Orders. Such
orders shall be transmitted to all commands by inter-department communications. No
Emergency Special Order shall have force and effect for more than 72 hours from the
time issued. The following is a proper subject of an Emergency Special Order:
1. Department emergency such as a Code 1000 action.
VII. MEMORANDUMS:
Memorandums contain written information not warranting a formal order which may be
used to direct any segment or all personnel of the Olivette Police Department in specific
situations or to inform them of coming events. The following are proper subjects of
memorandums:
1. Explanatory information for Police Department personnel.
2. Date, time, and place for special events.
3. Written form of communications between all ranks of the Department.
Memorandums responding to higher command levels must go through the chain
of command of the person initiating the memorandum.
VIII. TRAINING BULLETINS:
A. Written information issued to convey topics of specific interest pertinent to
performance of the law enforcement task. Information can be received from books,
magazine articles, court decisions, etc.
B. All pertinent information will be disseminated to Department personnel through the
chain of command.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 5 of 7
IX. PREPARATION OF ORDERS:
Preparation of orders shall be in accordance with the following procedure:
1. Any member of the Department may submit order recommendations through
the chain of command to the Chief of Police.
2. Any member of the Department may submit drafts of new orders through the
chain of command to the Chief of Police.
3. Any mandated order, prior to the approval of the Chief of Police, will be
reviewed by the Deputy Chief to ensure the directive is in proper form and text,
and does not contradict or jeopardize the Department’s compliance with existing
standards.
X. FORMAT OF WRITTEN DIRECTIVES:
A. All General Orders shall have a standardized format, containing the agency name,
subject content, policy number, date of policy, and review or revised dates as applicable.
General Orders will be electronically tagged with subject matter and/or key searchable
words for easy access.
B. Command and Unit Orders
Bureau Commanders may issue orders within their respective command, provided that
such orders do not conflict with or change provisions of the General Orders Manual, or
other orders of the Chief of Police, and do not affect members of the Department outside
of their respective commands. Command and unit orders found by the Chief of Police to
conflict with the General Orders manual or provisions of this Rule will be canceled by
order of the Chief of Police.
XI. REVIEW AND REVISION OF DIRECTIVES, POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
A. The Bureau Commanders are responsible for ensuring that the General Orders
Manual and special orders are reviewed annually. All employees are encouraged to
recommend revisions or updates.
B. Examples of information that may also precipitate a review include, but are not
limited to:
1. Policy failure
2. Litigation
3. New legislation

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 6 of 7
4. New technology or techniques.
C. The Accreditation Manager will prepare final drafts of new/revised policies and
procedures for review of the supervisory staff and approval of the Chief of Police.
1. All revised policies will have a copy archived in PowerDMS prior to any
changes being made.
2. Revised policies, or sections of policies, will be noted on the last page as
revised with the revision date.
3. The revised policy will be signed by the Chief of Police.
D. Upon approval of the Chief of Police, new or revised policies, indexes, table of
contents or other written directives will be uploaded to PowerDMS by a Department
PowerDMS administrator. An email will be sent to all Department personnel advising
them of the upload. All Department personnel will review the newly uploaded document
and electronically sign it, acknowledging receipt of same within 15 days of the upload.
E. A file of all current and superseded policies and procedures will be maintained by the
Office of the Chief of Police.
XII. DISSEMINATION AND STORAGE OF DEPARTMENT DIRECTIVES:
A. The General Orders Manual will be disseminated electronically to all Department
sworn personnel via PowerDMS. Other members of the Department will receive copies
as needed.
B. Department personnel may print hard copies of all PowerDMS documents for
personal safekeeping if they choose.
C. Supervisors are responsible for ensuring that all officers under their command have
reviewed and understand all Department directives. Supervisors are also responsible for
relating explanations and answering questions posed by members under their supervision.
The electronic signature of Department personnel establishes proof that the person had an
opportunity to ask questions about the orders.
D. All receipt forms will be stored electronically in PowerDMS.
E. All Department personnel are individually responsible for staying current on General
Orders. Personnel will also be responsible for knowledge of and compliance with the
contents of the orders and directives.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD - 6.1
Page 7 of 7
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective date: 6/30/2009
Revised: 12/12/2011
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 2/22/2018
Revised: 4/2/2020
Revised: 12/18/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

