OPD - 7.1
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Line Inspection Procedures
Staff Inspection Procedures
INSPECTIONS
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish a procedure for an inspection process
at both the line and staff levels. Inspections are the function and responsibility of
command and are an integral part of any management system that holds employees
accountable for their performance. Line inspections will be conducted within the
Department to ensure the operational procedures of all components of the Department
conform to Department rules and are in accordance with existing law. Staff inspections
may be conducted at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
II. LINE INSPECTION PROCEDURES:
A. Formal and informal line inspections will include, but are not limited to:
1. Informal line inspections shall be conducted during routine operations to
ensure adherence to all Departmental policies, procedures, and written directives.
Immediate action shall be taken by the inspecting supervisor to correct any
deficiencies noted.
a. Appearance/Grooming/Uniform – Daily inspection is conducted by the
appropriate unit supervisor or commander. Inspections within the Bureau
of Field Operations are conducted at roll call.
b. Duty Weapons – At least monthly, supervisors will inspect the duty
weapon of each officer under their command.
c. Vehicle Inspection – Each officer will make a daily check of their
assigned vehicle at the beginning of their tour of duty. The inspection
should include overall condition of the vehicle, status of equipment,
necessary supplies, and the passenger compartment of vehicle for
contraband or weapons.

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD - 7.1
Page 2 of 4
2. Formal line inspections shall be conducted on a scheduled basis and
documented in a written report to the Deputy Chief. When possible, deficiencies
will be corrected immediately. Recommendations for additional corrective
measures will be included in the written report. Follow up inspections will be
completed to show that corrective measures have been taken.
a. Vehicles
The Sunday night shift commander will ensure patrol vehicles under
his/her control are inspected weekly. A Vehicle Inspection Checklist,
Form #OPD – F1063, will be submitted to the Bureau of Support Services
by Monday of each week.
b. Facilities
The Sunday night shift commander will inspect the building and grounds
weekly and submit a Facilities Inspection Report, form #OPD – F1067, to
the Bureau of Support Services by Monday of each week.
c. Holdover Area
Daily, the Day shift commander and the Night shift commander will
conduct, at least, one inspection of the holdover area, equipment, and
supplies during their shift and complete the Holdover Inspection Report,
form #OPD – F1064. The Sunday night shift commander will submit the
form to the Bureau of Support Services by Monday of each week.
d. Department - Issued Equipment
The Commander of the Bureau of Support Services will conduct an annual
inspection of the officers under his/her command to ensure the condition
and status of Department issued equipment. A written report will be made
to the Chief of Police on Form #OPD – F1070.
III. STAFF INSPECTION PROCEDURES:
A. General Guidelines
1. If authorized by the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief will be responsible for
ensuring that each organizational component is subject to staff inspection at least
once every three years by the Bureau of Investigations.
2. The Chief of Police may direct the commanding officers of the units not being
inspected to detach at least one supervisor to assist in the scheduled staff
inspection.

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD - 7.1
Page 3 of 4
3. Unless directed otherwise by the Chief of Police or bureau commander,
adequate advance notice will be provided to work elements scheduled for
inspection.
4. Staff inspections may be of the following two types:
a. General inspection
A complete inspection of all operational aspects of a Departmental
element, or
b. Specific inspection
An examination and evaluation of a single aspect of a Departmental
element.
5. While conducting a staff inspection, members of the Bureau of Investigation,
and the supervisor assigned to assist, act as direct representatives of the Chief of
Police and shall be afforded complete cooperation.
B. Staff inspections will consist of:
1. An evaluation of element policies and procedures to determine if they are
correct and adequately documented in written form;
2. An evaluation of the effectiveness of operational procedures relative to
component objectives and goals;
3. If applicable, an examination of the accounting procedures utilized to control
materials, supplies and any associated funds to ensure compliance with City
ordinance, policies and procedures; and
4. An evaluation of unit operations to determine if Department policies and
procedures are being followed.
C. Staff Inspection Reports
1. Written staff inspection reports shall be completed for each Organizational
component inspected. These reports shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police and
the appropriate bureau commander. A copy shall also be provided to the
supervisor of the inspected work element.
2. Each staff inspection report shall contain the following information:
a. The work element inspected and the supervisor’s name;

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD - 7.1
Page 4 of 4
b. The objective of the inspection;
c. A general discussion of the scope of the inspection;
d. The findings of the inspection, including positive aspects; and
e. Recommendations, if any.
3. Bureau commanders shall ensure that follow-up corrective measures are taken
by the appropriate supervisor(s) for any irregularities detailed in the staff
inspection report.
a. The supervisor responsible for correcting the cited deficiencies will
issue a written report, through the chain of command, to the Chief of
Police indicating what action was taken and confirming that the
deficiencies were corrected; or
b. If corrective action must be delayed, the supervisor shall forward
through the chain of command, a memorandum to the Chief of Police
detailing what action is planned to correct the irregularity and a timetable
for its implementation. A final report shall be forwarded through the
chain of command to the Chief of Police confirming when the deficiencies
are corrected.
4. Upon receipt of a report of corrective action taken, the Chief of Police may
direct the Bureau of Investigations to re-inspect the Organizational component
limiting the inspection to the area of previously noted deficiency and to issue
confirmation that the deficiencies have been corrected.
5. Staff inspection reports shall be maintained by the Chief of Police for three (3)
years.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 11/16/2009
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 4/10/2020
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 9/9/2024
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

