OPD – 8.1
Page 1 of 10
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Budget
Petty Cash Funds
Credit Cards
Equipment and Supply Inventory
Equipment Readiness
Accounts Received
Independent Audit
Internal Monitoring
Emergency Purchases
Grant Management
________________________________________________________________________
BUDGET PREPARATION
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish policy, chain of custody and procedures
for management of all Department fiscal matters and property.
II. POLICY:
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department to follow established Department and
City procedures, as well as applicable modern accounting principals, for fiscal
management, budgeting, purchasing, accounting, inventory control and the maintenance
of Department property.

-- 1 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 2 of 10
III. GENERAL:
A. As authorized in the City of Olivette Municipal Code Chapter 200, Article I, Section
200.010, the Chief of Police shall have general supervision, control and authority over the
Department of Police.
B. As the chief executive of the agency, the Chief of Police is designated as having the
authority and responsibility for the fiscal management of the Department. Additionally,
the Chief of Police shall be responsible for maintaining control over all Agency owned
property.
IV. PROCEDURES:
A. Budgeting
1. The City Manager is responsible for the preparation and presentation of the
overall City budget to the Mayor and City Council.
2. The Chief of Police, as the chief executive of the Department, is responsible for
submitting an annual budget proposal for the Department to the City Manager.
3. The fiscal year for the City of Olivette begins on July 1 and ends on June 30.
4. Prior to each fiscal year, the City Manager develops a budget calendar and
establishes a timeline for the budget process for the forthcoming fiscal year. The
Chief of Police submits the Department's budget proposal in accordance with the
timelines established by the City Manager. The final budget proposal for the City
must be approved by the Mayor and the City Council.
5. In preparation of submitting a proposed budget to the City Manager, the
Deputy Chief issues a memorandum to all personnel requesting that they submit,
in writing, any budget needs, recommendations, etc. to their supervisors. Any
items submitted for consideration must include detailed supporting documentation
such as justification, cost estimates, etc. The commanders of the organizational
components of the Department will then prepare their written recommendations
for the proposed budget based on operational/activity analysis and needs and
forward them to the Deputy Chief.
6. After receiving the input, the Chief submits the proposed Department budget to
the City Manager and Finance Director for review. The Chief, City Manager, and
Director of Finance meet to go over the budget and make any revisions as may be
appropriate.
7. Upon receiving the proposed budgets for each respective City department, the
City Manager prepares a draft budget for the Mayor and City Council. The City
Manager and the department heads will then meet in work sessions with the

-- 2 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 3 of 10
Mayor and City Council to discuss the proposed budget. Once all revisions are
completed, the Mayor and City Council vote to approve the overall budget.
8. All expenditures throughout the year must be in accordance with the budget as
approved by the Mayor and City Council. The Chief of Police will maintain a
ledger of all account expenditures and balances. The Finance Department will
provide monthly financial information regarding account expenditures.
9. Supplemental or emergency expenditures not included in the original budget
must be authorized by the City Manager or City Council, if required.
B. Purchasing and Accounting
1. The Chief of Police is responsible for all purchases made by the Department.
2. Prior to making any purchase or expenditure, authorization must be received
from the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may authorize any purchase up to
$1500.00 without the approval of the City Manager. In accordance with the
City’s Purchasing Policy 5.02, Revision C, a purchase order shall be obtained
from the Finance Department prior to any purchase over $1500.00
3. The Records Clerk serves as the purchasing clerk for the Department and is
responsible for the maintenance of all purchasing records and the payment of all
invoices approved for payment by the Chief of Police. This includes, but is not
limited to:
a. The creation of ledgers which list the initial appropriation for each
account;
b. Balances for each account at the beginning of each period;
c. Expenditures and encumbrances made during the period; and
d. Unencumbered balances.
4. Upon authorization for payment from the Chief of Police, the Records Clerk
processes all invoices for payment and forwards the invoices to the City's
accounts payable clerk for payment. The Police Department's Records Clerk
records and enters all required information into the City's central accounting
system.
C. Petty Cash Funds
1. The City's Finance Department is responsible for maintaining one petty cash
fund not to exceed $100 on hand. The Finance Department is also responsible for
accepting and disbursing petty cash funds.

-- 3 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 4 of 10
2. Petty cash funds are received upon request from Police Department personnel
as needed. Police Department personnel must obtain a receipt for all purchases
made. This receipt will be given to the City’s Finance Department.
3. Investigation Funds will generally be made available through the Petty Cash
fund for drug purchases, informants, liquor investigations, etc. In lieu of receipts,
a memorandum must be submitted documenting the expenditure of petty cash for
investigations. If an investigation requires more than $50, the Chief of Police
may request the Finance Department forward additional funds within the amount
budgeted for investigations.
4. The Finance Department will be responsible for maintaining all records,
receipts, ledgers, etc/ related to petty cash funds utilized by the Police
Department.
5. All expenditures shall receive prior approval from the Chief of Police.
6. All petty cash expenditures will be documented with invoices or receipts and,
when no receipt is available, with a memorandum describing the transaction.
D. Credit Cards
1. It is the responsibility of the Chief of Police and Deputy Chief to maintain
custody and control of the Department credit cards. Use is limited in scope and
may only be used with the prior approval of the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief.
2. When use of the credit card has been authorized, personnel using the card will
submit the receipt to the Records Clerk.
3. Receipts from credit card purchases will be maintained by the Records Clerk
and documented through the City’s financial software system.
E. Equipment and Supply Inventory
1. The Community Engagement Officer is responsible for maintaining an
inventory of all Department owned equipment and resources. The inventory
master list is shared between the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief and Community
Engagement Officer. The inventory shall be updated as needed and shall include a
description of the item, the date purchased, value or approximate value of the item
and current assignment or location of the item.
2. The Deputy Chief shall conduct, annually, a Department wide inventory and
audit of Department owned property, equipment and resources.

-- 4 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 5 of 10
F. Equipment Readiness and Issuance
1. Commanders and supervisors are responsible for equipment (i.e. vehicles,
radios, radar units, weapons, etc.) assigned to their respective bureaus or units.
2. Individual employees are responsible for equipment assigned specifically to
them.
3. Bureau commanders and supervisors are responsible for ensuring the
operational readiness, including preventative maintenance, inspection, etc., of
equipment assigned to their respective bureau, etc. Individual employees are
responsible for the operational readiness, including preventative maintenance,
inspection, etc., of equipment assigned specifically to them.
4. The Deputy Chief is responsible for ensuring inspection and maintenance of the
overall condition of the Police Department's portion of the building.
5. Any equipment that is not functioning properly or is in a state of disrepair shall
be promptly reported, via the chain or command, to the Deputy Chief who will
take the appropriate action.
6. The issuance or re-issuance of Department equipment, etc. is the responsibility
of the Deputy Chief.
a. Personnel requiring replacement equipment shall submit a memo to
his/her supervisor who will forward the memo to the Deputy Chief.
b. Upon approval, the Deputy Chief will make the necessary arrangements
for obtaining and issuing the requested item(s).
c. The issuance of replacement equipment requires the employee to return
to the Deputy Chief the unserviceable items for storage or disposal.
d. All officers will be provided with a $800.00 clothing allowance per
fiscal year which will be maintained in an account at the Leon Uniform
Company.
e. Personnel authorized by the Deputy Chief to wear civilian attire as daily
uniforms may submit receipts with form #OPD - F1153 for reimbursement
as a part of their yearly clothing allowance.
f. The issuance of pistols and ammunition will be the responsibility of the
Department Armorer/Firearms Instructor. The Armorer/Firearms
Instructor shall maintain a cross index of personnel and equipment issued.
This shall be submitted to the Deputy Chief for entry into the inventory

-- 5 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 6 of 10
spreadsheet. No pistol shall be issued to any employee without first
receiving prior authorization from the Chief of Police.
g. Upon separation of the employee from the Department, the return of the
equipment shall be documented and maintained by the Deputy Chief.
G. Accounts Received
1. Money received from police incident and accident reports, false alarm fees,
etc., shall be collected by City Hall personnel.
2. These transactions shall be balanced by the Finance Department and deposits
will be made daily when applicable.
H. Independent Audit
1. The Director of Finance, in accordance with RSMo 105.145, shall provide for
an independent audit of all the financial transactions and accounts of the City to
be made at the close of each fiscal year.
2. Such audits will be conducted by a certified public accountant who shall submit
a report to the City each year.
I. Internal Monitoring
All requests for purchases will be transmitted through the chain of command to the Chief
of Police. All supervisors will, in the performance of their duties monitor Department
fiscal activities. Such internal monitoring serves to provide pertinent information for
determining whether established internal control procedures are being administered
effectively and for evaluation of performance of staff responsibilities for fiscal
management functions. Any discrepancies or suggestions for improvement should be
reported to Deputy Chief.
J. Emergency Purchasing Procedures
1. Emergency purchases for goods or services may be made utilizing the City’s
credit card or invoice procedures. These purchases should be made by authorized
personnel following the City’s purchasing guidelines. The transactions should be
identified on the monthly credit card statement or invoice as being made for
emergency reasons. The date and nature of the emergency should be included.
2. If an emergency occurs at any time that requires a greater amount of
expenditures than authorized on Department credit cards or account, the Chief of
Police should be notified immediately. The Chief of Police shall immediately
notify the Finance Director. The Finance Director, in conjunction with the City
Manager, will:

-- 6 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 7 of 10
a. Authorize the purchase to be made via invoice from the seller; or
b. Issue a City check for the goods or services.
3. Personnel making emergency purchases must submit justifications through
their chain of command by the next working day.
4. Whenever practical, the Department shall first secure at least three competitive
telephone bids from responsible bidders and purchase the required supplies or
services from the lowest responsible bidder meeting the necessary specifications.
V. GRANT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
This section provides direction to this Department for effective grant management.
A. Preliminary internal review.
1. Application for a new grant includes a preliminary review by the Chief of
Police for approval.
2. Application process.
The Grant Coordinator will submit all grant related information to the Chief of
Police specifying the following:
a. The granting agency;
b. The amount and purpose of the grant;
c. The approximate amount of City match required, including any related
City expenses which would not be covered by the grant;
d. The fiscal year in which the grant is anticipated to be received;
e. Any incidental risks or requirements to be considered;
f. An estimate of the total program/project cost, including any ongoing
impact on operations; and
g. Any other government agencies involved in the grant.
The information will be reviewed, and concerns or questions will be
communicated to the Grant Coordinator. If the decision is favorable, the Grant
Coordinator may proceed with the grant application.

-- 7 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 8 of 10
B. Acceptance process.
1. Upon notice of the grant award, the Chief of Police will notify the
City Manager of the award and the financial responsibilities to be
budgeted by the City.
2. The Grant Coordinator will forward copies of all processed grants
to the Finance Department for processing.
C. Budget process.
1. Upon written notification of the grant award, it is necessary to budget
the revenues and expenditures for the activity.
2. The Grant Coordinator and the Finance Department will track grant
revenues and expenditures.
D. Records management process
A complete set of records will be maintained in accordance with the Records Retention
Policy of this Department and all applicable State and Federal laws.
E. Purchasing process
Within this Department, the Chief of Police has been given authority and responsibility as
the Purchasing Agent for formal purchasing activity. The key provisions for ensuring
compliance with Federal and State grant requirements are summarized below:
1. Make maximum, most economical use of available resources.
2. Provide maximum open and free competition in purchasing
transactions.
3. Use purchasing methods which meet Federal and State requirements as
well as comply with the City’s Purchasing Policy.
4. Conduct analysis of decisions to determine appropriateness of contract
pricing or contract costs.
5. Provide documentation to substantiate compliance with requirements
(1) through (4).
F. Accounting process
The Grant Coordinator maintains records in coordination with the Finance Department
constituting grant financial reporting.

-- 8 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 9 of 10
1. The Grant Coordinator is responsible for providing staffing resources to create
the original supporting documentation for grant expenditures and to verify that
these are correctly recorded in the City's accounting system (e.g., time sheets,
accounts payable).
2. The Finance Department is responsible for maintaining the purchasing, payroll,
accounts payable, accounts receivable, cash receipts and systems according to
grantor standards.
G. Cash management process
Programs funded with grant revenues are not to rely on general City cash resources to
meet cash flow shortfalls. Grant draw downs are to be requested from the grantor agency
as soon and as often as practical.
1. The Grant Coordinator prepares requests for grant draw downs on the grantor's
forms according to the decided upon schedule.
2. Federal grant payments are requested by letter of credit to be disbursed by
Federal funds wire.
3. Checks for State and local grants are made payable to the City of Olivette and
mailed to the City of Olivette, ATTN: Director of Finance, 1140 Dielman Road,
Olivette, MO 63132.
4. Grant payments by Federal funds wire are directed to the contracted bank for
credit to the City Olivette control account.
H. Program compliance process
Successful grant management requires that the City be able to demonstrate that the
service delivery and/or project requirements of the grant have been met.
1. The Grant Coordinator is responsible for constantly monitoring performance to
ensure that time schedules are being met, projected work units by time periods are
being accomplished, and other performance goals are being achieved.
2. The Finance Department will consult with the Grant Coordinator on program
compliance issues.
I. Audit process
1. The audit of a grant includes program compliance as well as financial
compliance. The grant may be audited annually or at the end of the project or
program. State and local grants are audited by the agency involved. Federal grants

-- 9 of 10 --

OPD – 8.1
Page 10 of 10
are audited under the Single Audit Act of 1984 and in accordance with OMB
Circular A-128.
2. The Finance Department will assess the audit requirements for the grant and
develop the plans for the audit with cooperation from the Grant Coordinator
3. For Federal grants, the Finance Department may schedule a Single Audit Act
audit as part of the annual City comprehensive audit and keep the Grant
Coordinator informed of the schedule.
4. The Finance Department will schedule all other audits with the granting
agencies and keep the Grant Coordinator informed of the schedule.
5. The Finance Department and the Grant Coordinator are responsible for meeting
auditor information needs for financial and compliance testing.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 3/5/2010
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 2/22/2018
Revised: 7/24/2020
Revised: 6/15/2021
Revised: 11/7/2023
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 10 of 10 --

