OPD - 9.1
Page 1 of 19
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Use of Deadly Response to Resistance or Aggression
Less Than Lethal Weapons
Response to Resistance or Aggression - Off-Duty
_____________________________________________________________________
RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION: LETHAL AND LESS
THAN LETHAL WEAPONS
I. PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines for the use of lethal
and less than lethal response to resistance or aggression by police officers. This
Guideline is for Department use only and does not apply in any criminal or civil
proceedings. The Guideline should not be construed as a creation of a higher legal
standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with respect to third party claims.
B. This Guideline will only form the basis for Department administrative review and
possible corrective action concerning conduct allegedly performed without regard for
these guidelines although that conduct may conform to all legal norms of care and
safety.
II. POLICY
A. The Department recognizes and respects the value and special integrity of each
human life. In vesting police officers with the lawful authority to respond to
resistance or aggression to protect the public welfare, a careful balancing of all human
interests is required. Officers may be confronted with situations where control must
be exercised to affect arrests and to protect the public safety. Control may be
achieved verbally through instruction, advice, warnings, persuasion, or the use of
physical force.
B. While the use of reasonable force may be necessary in situations which cannot be
otherwise controlled, force may not be resorted to unless other reasonable alternatives
have been exhausted or would clearly be ineffective under a set of circumstances.
Therefore, it is the policy of this Department that police officers will only use

-- 1 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 2 of 19
reasonable force, as a response to resistance or aggression, to accomplish lawful
objectives, while protecting the lives and safety of the officer or another. Verbal or
physical abuse is forbidden.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. Police Officer – A commissioned employee of the Olivette Police Department.
B. Deadly Response to Resistance or Aggression – That response which is intended to
cause death or serious physical injury, or which creates some specified degree of risk
that a reasonable and prudent person would consider likely to cause death or serious
physical injury.
C. Less Than Lethal Response to Resistance or Aggression – A degree of response
which is considered less than lethal. That level of response necessary and reasonable
to restrain, subdue, or control a resistant individual or unlawful situation which
involves the use of physical strength, chemical agent or other less than lethal weapon.
D. Lethal Weapon – Any weapon that has the capability of and was designed to cause
death.
E. Less Than Lethal Weapon – A weapon designed not to cause death when properly
used.
F. Substantial Risk – The possibility that a certain and undesirable outcome or result
is real and considerable.
G. Serious Physical Injury – An injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
causes severe disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any
body part.
H. Reasonable Belief – A logical, articulate conclusion drawn from facts and
circumstances, which would be evident to a person of average intelligence and
intellect.
I. De-escalation - Non-coercive de-escalation is recognizing, creating, and
maintaining conditions that allow someone to de-escalate their own emotions.
IV. RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL
A. Command and Supervisory Responsibility
1. Department commanders and supervisors have a responsibility to closely
monitor the day-to-day performance of employees under their supervision.
Command and supervisory personnel must maintain an awareness of any
employee experiencing problems in dealing with the public and make
recommendations for specific remedial action, training, or counseling for such

-- 2 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 3 of 19
employees whenever appropriate. Commanders and supervisors are accountable
for the awareness and compliance by police officers with the provisions of this
Operational Guideline.
2. No commissioned employee shall be authorized to carry a firearm or other
lethal or less than lethal weapon until he/she has been issued a copy of the
Response to Resistance or Aggression and Authorized Weapons general orders
and received instructions on both.
B. Individual Employee Responsibility
1. Every employee of this Department has the responsibility to immediately
contact the Deputy Chief and report any act which they believe involves the use
of excessive response to resistance or aggression as described in this General
Order.
2. Any employee who fails to report information of which they are aware
concerning either physical or verbal abuse against any citizen by another member
of this Department is subject to disciplinary action.
3. All employees are required to intervene within their scope of authority and
training and notify appropriate supervisory authority if they observe another
agency employee or public safety associate engage in any unreasonable use of
force or if they become aware of any violation of departmental policy,
state/provincial or federal law, or local ordinance.
C. Deputy Chief
1. In addition to investigating alleged acts of misconduct, the Deputy Chief will
also have the responsibility to identify patterns and causes of citizen complaints
and may recommend a counseling program as a means of preventing similar
complaints from occurring in the future.
2. The Deputy Chief will also forward to the Chief of Police an annual report
analyzing incidents involving responses to resistance or aggression by
Department employees and the circumstances surrounding these incidents.
V. DE-ESCALATION
A. Officers should consider that taking no action or passively monitoring the situation
may be the most reasonable response to an incident especially if the person appears to
be having a mental health crisis.
B. Once it is determined that a situation appears to be a mental health crisis and
immediate safety concerns have been addressed, responding members should be
aware of the following considerations and should, when feasible:

-- 3 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 4 of 19
1. Evaluate safety conditions.
2. Introduce themselves and attempt to obtain the person’s name.
3. Be patient, polite, calm, courteous and avoid overreacting.
4. Speak and move slowly and in a non-threatening manner.
5. Moderate the level of direct eye contact.
6. Remove distractions or disruptive people from the area.
7. Demonstrate active listening skills (e.g., summarize the person’s verbal
communication).
8. Provide for sufficient avenues that allow officers more time, distance, cover
and tactical flexibility should the situation become volatile.
C. Responding officers generally should not:
1. Use stances or tactics that can be interpreted as aggressive.
2. Allow others to interrupt or engage the person.
3. Corner a person who is not believed to be armed, violent or suicidal.
4. Argue, speak with a raised voice or use threats to obtain compliance.
VI. NECESSARY RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION
A. Response to resistance or aggression covers a wide range of techniques. These
techniques may range from officer presence, verbal direction or de-escalation, empty
hand control, intermediate weapons (O.C. spray, Taser X26P, riot baton) and lethal
response. The variety of options available in a confrontational setting is often
referred to as the “Resistance Control Continuum.” From options in the continuum,
officers are expected to employ only the level of response necessary to control the
situation. Resistance from a suspect can be nonverbal uncooperative, verbal
uncooperative, passive resistive, defensive resistive, active aggressive, deadly assaults
or any combination thereof. The amount of response used should be based on the
amount of resistance perceived by the officer. The response to resistance or
aggression by the officer shall, when circumstances permit, be progressive in nature.
The option used from the resistance control continuum will vary with each situation.
The level of response may escalate at any time and officers must be prepared to meet
the threat with that amount of response which is objectively reasonable to control the
situation.

-- 4 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 5 of 19
B. In making an arrest, no more response shall be used than is reasonably necessary
for the safe custody of the arrestee, or for overcoming any resistance that may be
offered, and for ensuring the delivery of the arrestee into safekeeping. When
resistance ceases, police response to resistance should likewise stop. Unnecessary or
excessive response is wrongful and prohibited.
C. The use of excessive response to resistance or aggression shall result in certain
corrective action and may result in criminal prosecution.
D. Any instance where a response to resistance or aggression results in injury,
officers must provide for appropriate first aid measures and transport the arrestee to a
Department approved hospital for examination, treatment, and obtain a “Fit for
Confinement.”
E. Where deadly response to resistance or aggression is not authorized, officers
should assess the incident to determine which less than lethal technique or less than
lethal weapon will best deescalate the incident and get it under control in a safe
manner. Only the reasonable amount of response necessary to bring an incident
under control is authorized.
F. Police officers are authorized to use less than lethal response to resistance or
aggression, including the use of Department approved less than lethal weapons for
resolution of incidents, as follows:
1. To protect themselves or another from physical harm; or
2. To restrain or subdue a resistant individual; or
3. To bring an unlawful situation safely and effectively under control.
G. The Department permits the use of three less than lethal weapons: Oleoresin
Capsicum aerosol spray (O.C.), Taser X26P and riot baton. Police officers may
utilize these items as an appropriate level of response as outlined in the Resistance
Control Continuum shown in Section IX.
H. Procedures to be followed when necessary response to resistance or aggression is
used:
1. Whenever a commissioned employee uses or attempts to use a response to
resistance or aggression under extraordinary circumstances that vary from the
standard handcuffing or detention techniques, the on-duty supervisor must be
immediately notified.
2. In those situations where a response is used, a Response to Resistance or
Aggression Notification form must be prepared, and the supervisor must respond
to the scene.
3. Commissioned employees at the scene of such an incident are responsible for

-- 5 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 6 of 19
ensuring that appropriate medical care is rendered to anyone in need of such
treatment.
4. Upon arrival at the scene, the supervisor shall be responsible for ensuring:
a) A thorough investigation is conducted, and a complete area canvas shall be
immediately undertaken to locate, identify, and interview all witnesses to this
incident.
b) Anyone arrested as a result of such an incident will be transported in a
police vehicle by a commissioned officer not directly involved in the incident
when feasible. If the arrestee needs medical treatment, he/she will be
transported by appropriate means; and
c) A complete and accurate police report shall be prepared, and warrant
application made, if necessary, while the suspect is in custody and within
twenty-four (24) hours of the original incident, and
d) A copy of the completed report shall be forwarded through the chain of
command to the Deputy Chief without delay.
I. Required Police Report Components
Whenever a commissioned employee uses or attempts to use a response to resistance
or aggression under extraordinary circumstances that vary from the standard
handcuffing or detention techniques, the police report and supplemental report, if any,
will contain the following information:
1. The number of officers involved in the incident, their method of arrival
(marked police unit vs. unmarked vehicle) and whether the officers were in
uniform or plain clothes apparel.
2. A description of the scene upon arrival and verbal commands initially given to
the suspect.
3. The subject’s reaction to officer/s
a) Verbal response (s)
b) Body language
c) Physical actions
4. The suspect’s condition, i.e., apparent influence of drugs or alcohol, mental
condition, highly agitated, etc.
5. The officer’s action

-- 6 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 7 of 19
a) Type of control methods used or attempted
b) The duration of subject’s resistance
c) Type of de-escalation methods used (immediate removal, etc.)
d) Methods of restraint (handcuffs, leg irons, etc.)
6. Name of transporting officer, method of transport (patrol vehicle, etc.)
transportation destination, and the subject’s demeanor and actions during
transport.
7. Name of supervisor who interviewed witness (es), if applicable, and name/s of
any witness(es) and their statement/s.
VII. MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS
A. Following when any law enforcement action is taken or any degree of response to
resistance or aggression is used on an individual and injuries are sustained, Officers
shall make sure appropriate medical aid is rendered as quickly as reasonably possible.
Officers shall activate the emergency medical system by requesting EMS to the scene
when:
1. The individual requests medical treatment.
2. The individual complains of injury or pain.
3. Any officer observes or suspects that obvious severe injuries have occurred,
and/or medical distress is apparent, and/or the individual is unconscious.
4. Directed by a supervisor or other appropriate authority.
In addition to activating the emergency medical system, immediate medical aid
consistent with the employee's training should be administered for any obvious severe
injuries or unconsciousness.
B. When an officer determines that an individual needs medical treatment, the officer,
in addition to making medical treatment available shall:
1. Notify their supervisor at the earliest available opportunity.
2. Promptly notify their supervisor of the individual’s condition after the
individual has been examined by the appropriate medical care provider.
C. A Fit for Confinement (FIT) authorization document shall be obtained from the
medical care provider if the provider determines the individual is fit for confinement.

-- 7 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 8 of 19
D. Officers who obtain medical treatment for an individual shall document this
information, along with the name of the medical care provider, the nature of the
injury or complaint of injury, in a police report.
VIII. PROGRESSIVE RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION
A. Progressive response to resistance or aggression refers to the escalation of
response used by an officer to control a situation, from minimal to maximum
response. The response to resistance or aggression by officers shall follow the
training standards established by the Department. Officers of this Department may
only use the level of response that is objectively reasonable under the circumstances
to neutralize or prevent unlawful behavior.
B. Cooperative Level – In the course of normal patrol, the officer’s contact with the
general population is vastly more positive than negative, and likewise, much more
prone to be non-confrontational. Even in exceptional cases, the officer may simply
re-adjust his/her spatial positioning or elicit greater eye contact (body language
methods) and gain reluctant compliance of the individual. Or the non-compliant
individual may have the officer’s request repeated or be verbally convinced that
increased reluctance need not progress to resistance (verbal persuasion methods)
culminating in eventual compliance.
1. In dealing with people, each officer must attempt to make his/her contact
one which inspires respect and generates cooperation and approval of the
public. A citizen’s encounter with the police can be a frightening, emotional
experience and under these circumstances, the risk of misunderstanding is
great.
2. The manner and form in which an officer speaks to the individual(s) can be
an effective means of controlling a situation. Verbal response may be in the
form of warnings, advice, persuasion, volume, and tone control and may in
and of itself, be progressive in nature, depending on the circumstances. All
are effective means of utilizing reasonable and necessary response to
resistance or aggression. If used properly, officers may not have to resort to
the use of other forms of response.
3. The majority of arrests made by officers of this Department are made
peacefully; the prisoner is handcuffed, searched, and transported. In these
situations, there is neither resistance, nor the need to use physical response.
On occasion, some form of physical maneuvering may be required to escort
the individual from one location to another; however, this simple direction is
not a response to resistance or aggression as defined in this General Order.
C. Resistance Level I – On occasion, police officers are faced with an uncooperative
individual or one who refuses to be placed in custody and other alternatives would be,
or have been, ineffective or inappropriate. Incidents of this nature require officers to

-- 8 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 9 of 19
use enough response to make a lawful arrest without unnecessarily aggravating the
situation. The object of this level is to gain compliance and control while minimizing
the risk of injury to the officer, the person being placed into custody, and innocent
bystanders. Control options could include body language, verbal persuasion, and soft
empty hand control techniques. OC spray may be an option at this level if exigent
circumstances exist (i.e. passive resister blocking an ambulance on an emergency run,
etc.)
D. Resistance Level II – Resistance in this classification is active in its scope and
intensity. The suspect’s indifference is expressed via physical defiance. The
individual may turn away from the officer and attempt to leave the scene. He may
actively resist the officer’s attempts at controls. The critical aspect of Resistance
Level II is that no violence has been directed toward the officer. It should be noted,
however, that resisting a control technique could directly or indirectly injure the
officer and, therefore, subsequent techniques deployed attempting to gain control of
the suspect could legitimately escalate into a higher level of non-compliance. Control
options for this level of resistance could include all techniques listed for Resistance
Level I as well as contact controls, joint restraints, nerve center controls, and use of
X26P.
E. Assault Level I – In this level the officer is met with active, hostile resistance
expressing itself in the form of physical attack upon the officer. Resistance keys
upon the direction of the violence as well as the intensity and, therefore, includes a
large realm of resistance activities. In each case, the specific judgment as to overall
scope of the violence must err on the side of officer safety.
1. Personal Weapons
This level of response to resistance or aggression involves the use of what is
commonly known as personal weapons (hands, feet, fist, elbow, knee etc.).
The use of personal weapons can be employed by officers to defend
themselves against unlawful assaults where higher levels of response are not
necessary and other verbal and physical response alternatives would be, or
have been, ineffective or inappropriate. Striking techniques may be delivered
with an officer’s open hand, fist, forearm, leg or foot. Primary target points
are the major muscle mass areas such as the legs, arms, shoulders, torso, or the
side of the neck. Strikes to these target areas should create temporary muscle
paralysis. Application of this level of response must be justified and
appropriate.
2. ASP Baton
The Department issued ASP baton is not authorized to be carried on an
officer’s duty belt. The ASP baton may be carried in the officer’s duty bag
and only deployed in the event of needing to use it in a different manner other
than striking another. Authorized use includes breaking a window, etc.

-- 9 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 10 of 19
3. Riot Baton
a. The Department issued riot baton may be utilized by uniformed
officers during events of civil unrest. The baton shall only be used in
accordance with current Departmental training standards. The use of
the baton shall be restricted to quelling physical confrontations where
other verbal or physical response alternatives would be, or have been,
ineffective or inappropriate.
b. Only riot batons issued by this Department shall be authorized for
use by officers.
c. Officers may use the baton as a redirect or striking tool. When used
as a striking tool, officers should avoid vulnerable areas such as the
head, neck, throat, and genitalia, where feasible.
d. Other types of striking devices are strictly prohibited and shall not
be carried while on duty or acting in an official capacity as a member
of this Department.
4. Taser X26P
a. The Taser X26P and two Air Cartridges will be utilized by police
officers who have successfully completed the Taser User Certification
Training Program and have been approved by the Taser Instructors.
The Taser X26P will be assigned to each officer at the beginning of
his/her shift; Air Cartridges will be permanently issued to each officer.
The Taser X26P is the only Conducted Electrical Weapons authorized
for use by employees of this Department.
b. Police officers will receive user re-certification training on the use
of the Taser X26P on an annual basis.
c. Authorized police officers in uniform assigned to enforcement
duties will carry the Taser X26P on their support side (opposite side of
body from firearm) in a Department-approved holster for the Taser
X26P.
d. Authorized police officers in uniform will carry the spare air
cartridge in a pouch on the duty belt.
e. Authorized police officers not in uniform have the option of
carrying the Taser X26P, in a Department-approved holster, and spare
air cartridge, in a pouch on their belt.

-- 10 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 11 of 19
f. Police officers may be restricted from using the Taser X26P by the
Deputy Chief or the Chief of Police.
5. O.C. Spray
a. The Department issued pepper spray is a product that uses a 10%
oleoresin capsicum (O.C.) formula, which is the extract from the
cayenne pepper plant.
b. O.C. spray, unlike CS and CN tear gas, is not an "irritant" but rather
an "inflammatory agent" that inflames the mucous membranes and
causes an extreme burning sensation to the skin and eyes and causes an
involuntary closure of the eyes.
c. Proper use of O.C. spray should reduce injuries to resisting suspects
and to officers.
d. Officers are authorized to carry only Department issued O.C. spray,
only after receiving training and demonstrating proficiency from a
certified instructor. Officers will receive user re-certification training
on the use of O.C. spray on, at least, a biennial basis.
e. The O.C. spray should only be used in a situation where you would
be justified in the use of an intermediate weapon to subdue a resisting
subject unless exigent circumstances exist (i.e. passive resister
blocking an ambulance on an emergency run, etc.)
f. The O.C. spray should be dispensed at least three feet from the
subject as the minimum engagement distance. Hold the canister
upright and use short, ½ to 1 second bursts, rather than a prolonged
spray. Only use the amount needed to bring the subject safely under
control, however more than three bursts are not recommended if the
spray is proving ineffective.
g. Spray directly into the subject's face. The spray should be directed
toward the subject's eyes, nose and mouth. The spray can be effective
on dogs and other animals. Dogs can be effectively subdued with a
short burst toward the eyes, nose and mouth.
h. Use caution when spraying in windy conditions. You could become
exposed.
i. Follow up Procedures

-- 11 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 12 of 19
1. O.C. spray causes acute inflammation of the eyes and all
other mucous membranes, resulting in extreme discomfort for
up to thirty minutes.
2. When the subject has been secured and resistance has
ceased, EMS should be requested at the scene to assist in
decontamination of the subject and perform a medical
evaluation of their condition. Officers should make every
reasonable effort to relieve the discomfort of the subject and
any affected bystanders. If conditions permit, clear water
will relieve the eye inflammation in several minutes. Moving
air and natural body action will remove all other symptoms in
thirty minutes or less. Showering may further relieve extreme
contamination cases.
3. Area contamination will be found to be negligible. Hands
should be washed to prevent any possible residue from being
rubbed in the eyes or before going to the restroom. Any
residue otherwise would not be expected to cause problems.
4. Contaminated contact lenses should be removed by EMS or
hospital personnel and cleaned before use. O.C. spray on
clothing will generally dissipate by exposure to fresh air.
Normal machine washing will remove all traces.
5. Do not allow the contaminated person to apply any salves,
lotions or creams. These will trap the oleoresin capsicum next
to the skin and may cause blistering. Water and fresh air are
the suggested methods of relieving the irritation.
6. If additional medical care is warranted, the arrestee shall be
taken to a medical facility for a Fit for Confinement
examination.
7. The officer shall include in the arrest report the details of the
incident and complete justification for the use of the O. C.
spray.
8. The officer will complete a Response to Resistance or
Aggression Notification form to be approved by the supervisor.
6. A less than lethal weapon may be used to protect an officer from a violent
animal when no other disposition is reasonably practical. This is not
considered a response to resistance or aggression as defined by this General
Order. Form #OPD – 1207, DISCHARGE OF WEAPON, must be completed
and forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.

-- 12 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 13 of 19
F. Assault Level II – At this level is the violent subject who by his/her actions creates
a reasonable assessment that his/her non-compliant activity has the potential to cause
the officer great bodily harm and even death. Most officers will readily, almost
instinctively, perceive when their actions are in defense of life and therefore, justified
in response options which range from the levels indicated earlier to include extended
range impact projectiles, weapons techniques with debilitating potential, service
firearm, and supplemental firearms.
1. All officers are equipped with a firearm to defend themselves or others
against deadly assaults. An officer shoots when it is reasonably necessary to
preserve his/her life or the life of another. When a firearm or other deadly
response is used, it must be within the realization that the death of a person
may occur.
2. Justification for the use of deadly response to resistance or aggression must
be limited to what reasonably appears to be the facts known to or perceived by
the officer at the time he/she decides to use such response. Facts unknown to
an officer, no matter how compelling, cannot later be considered in
determining whether the use of deadly response was justified.
3. An officer may use deadly response to resistance or aggression in the
defense of a citizen or him/herself from what he/she reasonably believes to be
an imminent threat of death or serious physical injury. This is so, if the
further risk of death or serious physical injury that the unapprehended violent
felon is likely to cause others, exceeds the risks inherent in the officer’s use of
deadly response.
4. Deadly response to resistance or aggression may be used to prevent the
escape of a fleeing felon when the officer has exhausted all other means of
capture and:
a. The officer reasonably believes that the person to be arrested has
used deadly force in the commission of a felony, or
b. The officer reasonably believes that the person whose arrest is
sought will inflict death or serious physical injury to the officer or to
others if the apprehension is delayed.
5. A lethal weapon may be used to kill seriously injured or dangerous animals
when no other disposition is reasonably practical. When feasible, officers
must obtain approval from a supervisor before such action is taken. This is
not considered a response to resistance or aggression as defined by this
General Order. Form #OPD – 1207, DISCHARGE OF WEAPON, must be
completed and forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of
Police.

-- 13 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 14 of 19
IX. THE RESISTANCE CONTROL CONTINUUM
This Department subscribes to and trains its employees in the concept of controlling
resistive behavior with techniques that have minimal chance of injury. As the level of
resistance increases, so too will the level of control methods escalate within the
continuum:
Levels of Resistance Appropriate Levels of Response
Physical Intimidation Officer Presence
Verbal Non-Compliance De-escalation/Verbal Direction
(Verbal refusal to comply) (Commands of direction or arrest)
Passive Resistance Soft Empty Hand Control (Pain
compliance with verbal
reinforcement), joint locks, Oleoresin
Capsicum Aerosols (exigent
circumstances)
Defensive Resistance Oleoresin Capsicum Aerosols, Riot
(Physically resists, non-assault) Baton (redirect), Hard Empty Hand
Control (Stun blows, motor dysfunction,
Taser X26P, etc.)
Active Aggression Riot Baton (striking)/Chemical agents
(Overt actions of assault) (Special weapons & ammunition,
Distraction devices, etc.)
Deadly Assaults Lethal Response
(Intent to cause death or serious
physical injury).
X. USE OF DEADLY RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION
A. Police officers may use deadly response to resistance or aggression only when:
1. The officer reasonably believes that the action is in defense of any human
life, including his/her own, in imminent danger of death or serious bodily
injury, or
2. Prevent the escape of a fleeing felon whom the officer has probable cause
to believe will pose an imminent threat to human life should escape occur.

-- 14 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 15 of 19
B. Before using a firearm, police officers shall identify themselves and state their
intentions, when feasible.
C. A police officer may also discharge a weapon under the following circumstances:
1. To give alarm or call assistance in an emergency when no other means can
reasonably be used, and then only in a safe direction.
2. During approved range training, performance of duty or as provided by
law. Department weapons shall not be carried or utilized for hunting, or
similar, non-law enforcement activity.
3. To terminate the life of an animal that represents a threat to public safety or
to humanely stop the suffering of a severely injured animal.
D. Police officers shall adhere to the following restrictions when their weapon is
exhibited:
1. Police officers shall not draw or exhibit their firearm unless circumstances
create reasonable cause to believe that it may be necessary to use the weapon
in conformance with this policy.
2. When the person to be apprehended has committed, or there is probable
cause to believe the person to be apprehended has committed, a felony offense
and the probability exists, based on the:
a. Severity of the charge,
b. Individual or number of individuals to be apprehended,
c. Credible information received concerning weapons and/or subject’s
propensity for violence,
d. Other circumstances under which the felony arrest may occur which
renders the drawing or display of a firearm as reasonable precaution,
or
e. When an officer fears for his/her safety.
3. No officer shall display or provide any weapon to a citizen to inspect,
examine or otherwise handle.
4. No officer shall furnish his/her firearm to any citizen or civilian enlisting
his/her assistance.
5. Warning shots are prohibited.

-- 15 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 16 of 19
6. Police officers shall not fire at or from a moving vehicle. Exceptions:
a. The occupant of the other vehicle is using, or threatening to use,
deadly force by means other than the vehicle, or
b. A vehicle is operated in a manner deliberately intended to strike an
officer or citizen, and, when feasible, other reasonable means of
defense have been exhausted, which includes moving out of the path
of the vehicle. The safety of innocent persons should not be unduly
jeopardized by the officer’s actions.
7. Firearms are not to be discharged towards, into, or at a crowd or gathering
or when it appears likely that an innocent person may be injured.
8. Police officers shall fire weapons to stop an assailant from completing a
potentially deadly act as described in the Order. For maximum stopping
effectiveness and minimal danger to innocent bystanders, the officer shall
shoot “center body mass.”
E. Deadly response to resistance or aggression by means other than firearms:
1. Deadly response may consist of the use of items, articles, instruments, or
equipment other than firearms that are designed, intended, and routinely
utilized for other legitimate police purposes such as vehicles, batons,
flashlights, etc.
2. Deliberate use of any such item, article, instrument, or equipment for any
purpose other than that for which it was designed and intended, or in a
potentially deadly manner, is prohibited except in cases where the use of
deadly response is specifically authorized by this Order.
3. Strikes to the head, neck, throat, and clavicle should be avoided. These may
occur only as a last resort when no other means of control exists, and the use
of deadly response is justified.
4. “Choke holds”, “strangle holds,” and other similar holds that restrict the
ability to breathe are prohibited. These may occur only as a last resort when
no other means of control exists, and the use of deadly response is justified.
5. Use of Vascular Neck Restrictions is prohibited.
XI. DEATH OR SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY – POST INCIDENT
PROCEDURES

-- 16 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 17 of 19
A. When, in an official capacity, an employee’s actions result in death or serious
physical injury, the employee will be removed from operational assignment, pending
an administrative review. In that regard, the following procedures will be instituted:
1. The involved employee will be removed from the incident scene as soon as
practical.
2. A reasonable recovery period (1-2 hours) may be allowed before any
questioning of the involved employee is conducted.
3. The involved employee will be removed from their current duty assignment
and placed on paid administrative leave/assignment pending further
review/investigation of the incident. An administrative assignment may be in
the form of an on-duty assignment as determined by the Chief of Police. The
employee involved will remain on the administrative assignment until
otherwise determined by the Chief of Police. The assignment to administrative
leave shall not be interpreted to imply or indicate that the employee has acted
improperly.
4. The employee will be referred to the City of Olivette Employee Assistance
Program (EAP) for a counseling session with a specialist in post critical
incident counseling. This referral will be for support purposes, allowing the
employee to discuss any problems resulting from the incident. The contents of
this session will remain confidential and will not be available to the
Department or used by the Department in subsequent proceedings. In
exceptional circumstances, the employee may be referred to a mental health
professional in preference to the Employee Assistance Program.
5. Following this counseling, the Chief of Police will schedule the employee
for an interview with a psychologist hired by the Department. This interview
with the psychologist will be used to determine if the employee is
psychologically fit to return to duty. Information discussed during this
interview and the psychologist’s recommendation, while treated in a
confidential manner, will be provided to the Department in a written report.
6. Participation in this program is mandatory for employees whose action(s) or
response to resistance or aggression results in the death of a person.
XII. DEFENSIVE TACTICS TRAINING
A. Officers shall receive in-service training on, at least, a biennial basis regarding
defensive tactics and the use of response to resistance or aggression and control holds.
This training will be consistent with current legal trends and generally accepted law
enforcement procedures.

-- 17 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 18 of 19
1. Only certified instructors will be utilized to present this training. Although
not required, it is preferred that the instructors be sworn members of this
Department.
2. A training syllabus will be prepared by the lead instructor and submitted
for review to the Deputy Chief, prior to the first class.
3. The Deputy Chief will review the material and forward the appropriate
recommendation to the Chief of Police based on the syllabus content.
4. All training syllabi will be approved by the Chief of Police prior to
implementation.
5. The Deputy Chief is responsible for coordinating the training program, to
include the scheduling process, equipment, and facility acquisition.
a. Entries of this training shall be made on the officer’s individual
training record.
b. A list of officers failing to attend or pass the required training shall
be prepared and forwarded to the Deputy Chief for appropriate
corrective action.
6. All sworn personnel below the rank of Deputy Chief shall be required to
attend these training sessions as scheduled, unless excused for a justifiable
reason by the Chief of Police.
XIII. RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION WHILE OFF-DUTY OR
OUTSIDE THE CITY OF OLIVETTE
A. Commissioned employees that respond to resistance or aggression in a law
enforcement capacity while off-duty or outside the City of Olivette will immediately
request the appropriate law enforcement agency to respond to the scene and comply
with all legal requirements of that venue. The employee will ensure that appropriate
medical care is rendered to anyone in need of such treatment.
B. The employee will notify dispatch of the incident as soon as possible.
1. When the incident occurs within the City of Olivette procedures outlined
previously in this Operational Guideline will be followed. Should the place of
occurrence be within another jurisdiction, the employee will cooperate with the
local authorities if they also desire a report.
2. When the incident occurs within a municipal area, unincorporated St. Louis
County, or the City of St. Louis and the employee is on-duty, dispatch will make
notification to the employee’s supervisor, or his/her designee, who will respond to
the scene if available and cooperate with the local authorities in the investigation.

-- 18 of 19 --

OPD - 9.1
Page 19 of 19
The supervisor will ensure that a Response to Resistance or Aggression
Notification form is prepared and attached to a copy of the investigating agency’s
report.
3. While off-duty, if an employee responds to resistance or aggression outside of
the City of Olivette in a law enforcement capacity, the employee will notify the
on-duty supervisor through dispatch. The on-duty supervisor will prepare a
Response to Resistance or Aggression Notification form and contact the
investigating agency to determine if the incident was justified. A copy of the
investigating agency’s report will be attached to the Response to Resistance or
Aggression Notification form and forwarded through the Chain of Command to
the Chief of Police.
XIV. TRAINING/ISSIUNG RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION
POLICY:
Because of the importance of this policy, each commissioned police officer will be
issued a copy and receive documented annual instructional training concerning its
contents. All future members of this Department will also be issued a copy of this
policy and receive identical instruction on its contents before being allowed to carry
any authorized lethal or less than lethal weapon. Policy familiarization will be
conducted annually, and the policy will be reviewed and updated as necessary.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 2/5/2009
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 4/22/2015
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 3/14/2018
Revised: 4/30/2018
Revised: 5/22/2018
Revised: 4/10/2020
Revised: 6/18/2020
Revised: 6/24/2020
Revised: 9/14/2020
Revised: 1/08/2021
Revised: 11/22/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 5/20/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 19 of 19 --

