OPD - 9.2
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Authorized Weapons
Firearms and Ammunitions
Gun Safes
Chemical Agents
Impact Weapons
Prohibited Weapons
AUTHORIZED WEAPONS
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish which weapons this Department has
approved for use.
II. AUTHORIZED WEAPONS:
A. Prior to issuing or approving weapons intended for on-duty use, and each year
thereafter, Department armorers or certified weapons instructors shall inspect the
weapons for compliance and safety. Department armorers or certified weapons
instructors shall maintain a record on each weapon approved by the Agency for use.
B. All Department issued weapons found to be unsafe will be removed from service until
rendered safe:
1. The officer that discovers a Department issued weapon to be defective or non-
functioning shall immediately report it to his/her supervisor, the appropriate
Department armorer or certified instructor and the Deputy Chief.
2. The supervisor, armorer, instructor, or Deputy Chief will remove the weapon
from service and a spare weapon shall be issued to the Officer pending repair or
replacement of the defective weapon.

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 9.2
Page 2 of 6
3. The defective weapon will be stored in the Department Armory until it is
repaired or replaced.
4. The officer discovering the defective or non-functioning weapon will make
notification to the Deputy Chief documenting the weapon type, serial number (if
applicable) and description of the defect or malfunction.
5. If an officer’s personally owned off-duty or secondary firearm is found to be
defective or non-functioning, it shall not be approved for use as an off-duty or
secondary firearm until it has been repaired, inspected by a Department armorer
and the officer re-qualifies with the weapon. The officer will make notification to
the Deputy Chief documenting the firearm make, model, serial number and
description of the defect or malfunction.
C. Only personnel demonstrating proficiency in the use of authorized or issued weapons
may carry such weapons. Training and proficiency testing will be conducted and
documented by the Department armorer and certified weapons instructors.
III. FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION:
A. Commissioned employees, on duty, in the City of Olivette, will be required to carry a
badge, firearm, and the issued identification card.
B. Commissioned employees, off-duty, may carry a firearm but will be required to carry
a badge and issued identification card when in the City of Olivette.
C. Any firearm that is removed from duty for any reason shall be stored in the
department armory until placed back into service. This includes removing the patrol rifle
from the patrol vehicles during routine maintenance.
D. Police officers will carry the Department issued weapon and ammunition described as:
1. Make- Glock G45 MOS
2. Caliber- 9X19mm
3. Barrel- 4.02 Inches
4. Action- Safe Action
5. Polymer frame, Slide: DLC finish
6. Magazine- Glock Magazine, (17) Seventeen round capacity
7. Grips- Black Polymer Factory Grips (grips may be changed by officer to accommodate
officers hand sizes)
8. Police patrol officers in uniform will carry a minimum of two (2) extra magazines;
each containing 17 rounds of the most recently issued Department ammunition.
E. Secondary Weapon:
1. While on duty, commissioned employees will be permitted to carry one additional
lethal weapon, excluding the Department patrol rifle.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 9.2
Page 3 of 6
2. The secondary weapon must be carried in a holster and concealed from public
view. It is only to be used in self-defense situations when the primary Department
issued weapon is either not available or impractical to use. The secondary weapon
must meet the following specifications:
a. The weapon carried must be a revolver or semiautomatic pistol with a
minimum capacity of five rounds.
b. Minimum caliber .380; maximum caliber .45 ACP
c. Must be equipped with a hammer block or firing pin safety.
d. Police officers carrying a secondary weapon must have first provided
the Department with a complete description of the weapon and
demonstrated their proficiency with the weapon as required of off-duty
weapons.
e. Weapons must be made by a reputable firm, and be registered with, and
approved for safety by the Department Armorer and the Chief of Police.
f. Ammunition for the secondary weapon must be Department approved.
F. On-duty Police Officers in Civilian Attire
On-duty Police Officers in Civilian Attire shall carry the Department issued sidearm and
ammunition.
G. Patrol Rifle – Department issued Colt AR-15, 5.56 caliber, select fire rifle may be
used while on duty.
H. Exception – Officers assigned to certain activities, such as undercover investigations,
may work without a weapon or utilize specialized weapons not specified within this
policy with prior approval of the Department Armorer and the Chief of Police.
I. Off-Duty Weapons – When off-duty, commissioned officers are authorized to carry or
have accessible to them:
1. The Department issued Glock pistol, or
2. A personally owned revolver or semiautomatic pistol with a minimum caliber
of .380 to a maximum caliber of .45 ACP. Personally, owned weapons carried off
duty must be registered with and approved for safety by the Department Armorer
and the Chief of Police.
3. Off-duty weapons are to be carried concealed in a holster, or in the case of
female officers, in a purse or handbag.

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 9.2
Page 4 of 6
J. Gun Safes
1. Officers often store Department issued firearms at their homes. In an attempt
to provide additional means of safety for its officers and their families, the
Department will provide gun safes for all Department issued weapons.
2. When Department issued weapons are at an officer’s private residence and the
weapon is not in the possession of the officer, the weapon shall be stored in the
gun safe and the safe shall be locked. The officer will administratively unload the
weapon prior to placing it in the safe.
3. The safe shall be secured to the structure of the home (i.e. floor, wall) which is
out of view and the safe shall always be locked.
4. Officers will sign a compliance document confirming the safe is properly
installed and the Department weapon shall be stored in the safe according to
Section K.
5. Officers who decline to utilize the Department issued safe or install same in
their home shall store the Department weapon in a secure locker at the Police
Department, unless they own a safe of equal or superior quality. The officer shall
provide the Deputy Chief documentation of ownership and otherwise comply with
this policy.
K. Ammunition – All service/ practice ammunition must be Department approved.
1. Department issued service ammunition for the Glock 9mm pistol is Federal
Premium Law Enforcement 147 grain.
2. Department issued practice ammunition for the Glock 9mm pistol is Federal,
Winchester, or Speer Lawman FMJ Ball 115 or 124 grain.
3. Department issued service ammunition for the Colt AR-15 rifle is Federal, .223
caliber, 55 grain, Sierra Gameking BTHP.
4. Department issued practice ammunition for the Colt AR-15 rifle is Federal,
Winchester, or PMC, .223 caliber, 55 grain FMJ.
Ammunition for personally owned department approved back up or off-duty weapons
will be factory-loaded ammunition appropriate to the approved weapon. No reloads or
customized ammunition may be carried.
L. Flashlight- All duty pistols will have the department issued Streamlight TLR-7A
flashlight.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 9.2
Page 5 of 6
1. The officer will periodically test to ensure the battery and flashlight are
operating. If the flashlight needs a new battery the officer will change the
battery out.
2. The flashlight shall only be used during times when the pistol is being used in
the line of duty, it shall not be used as a standard flashlight (i.e., park checks
or contacting a driver on a traffic stop)
M. Red Dot Sights- All duty pistols will have the department issued Holosun sight
mounted to the pistol.
1. Only the department armorer is authorized to remove the sight for repair or
maintenance. The individual officer is allowed to change out the battery when
needed.
IV. CHEMICAL AGENTS:
A. Chemical agents must be used in accordance with Department training methods.
1. O.C. Spray
a. The Department issued pepper mace spray is a product that uses a 10%
oleoresin capsicum formula, which is the extract from the cayenne pepper
plant.
2. Other Chemical Agents: The following restrictions pertain to chemical agents
other than O.C. spray, such as CS and CN gas.
a. Chemical agents may be used at the discretion of a supervisory officer
when warranted in matters of crowd control, barricaded persons, etc.
b. Chemical agents shall be used only after all other reasonable efforts to
control the situation have failed and must be used by personnel trained in
the use of those agents.
c. Whenever chemical agents are used, the supervisory officer who
authorized usage shall forward a copy of the police report through the
chain of command to the Chief of Police listing the details of the incident
and justification for use of the chemical agent.
d. O.C. spray is the only chemical weapon issued to officers of this
Department. Deployment of other chemical weapons (i.e. CS or CN gas)
would be the responsibility of the St. Louis County Police Tactical Team.
V. CONDUCTED ELECTRICAL WEAPON

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 9.2
Page 6 of 6
A. The Taser X26P and two air cartridges will be utilized by police officers who have
successfully completed the Taser User Certification Training Program and have been
approved by the Taser Instructors. The Taser X26P will be assigned to each officer at the
beginning of his/her shift; air cartridges will be permanently issued to each officer. The
Taser X26P is the only Conducted Electrical Weapon authorized for use by employees of
this Department.
VI. IMPACT WEAPONS
A. The Department issued riot baton may be utilized by uniformed officers during events
of civil unrest. The baton shall only be used in accordance with current Departmental
training standards. The use of the baton shall be restricted to quelling physical
confrontations where other verbal or physical response alternatives would be, or have
been, ineffective or inappropriate.
B. The Department issued ASP baton is not authorized to be carried on an officer’s duty
belt as an impact weapon. The ASP baton may be carried in the officer’s duty bag and
only deployed in the event of needing to use it in a different manner other than striking
another. Authorized use includes breaking a window, etc.
C. Other personally owned batons are also prohibited.
VII. PROHIBITED WEAPONS:
A. Slappers, blackjacks, brass knuckles, weighted gloves and such.
B. Any other weapons not authorized by this policy.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 2/5/2009
Revised: 10/11/2012
Revised: 4/22/2015
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 3/21/2018
Revised: 5/15/2018
Revised: 7/8/2020
Revised: 5/12/2022
Revised: 12/18/2023
Revised: 6/4/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

