OPD - 9.3
Page 1 of 7
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Qualification Schedule
Failure to Qualify Procedure
Care of Weapons Used for Qualification
Loss or Theft of Firearm
Cleaning and Repair
Firearms Range
Patrol Rifles
Firearms Safety
Training
FIREARMS TRAINING AND QUALIFICATION
I. PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this General Order to establish standards of firearms proficiency for
Department personnel and to define the various courses of fire utilized in the
qualification process.
II. POLICY
It is the policy of the Olivette Police Department that all officers demonstrate proficiency
in the use of Department issued or authorized firearms. Firearms proficiency will be
determined by the satisfactory completion of in-service firearms qualification courses
designed to address the shooting skills required in police work. Officers shall review and
sign Olivette Police Department General Order #OPD - 9.1 RESPONSE TO
RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION: LETHAL AND LESS THAN LETHAL WEAPONS
annually to indicate that they understand Department policies as they relate to Response
to Resistance or Aggression.
III. QUALIFICATIONS SCHEDULE:

-- 1 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 2 of 7
A. All firearms training and qualification will be conducted by certified instructors,
using courses approved by the Deputy Chief. Firearms instructors shall be responsible
for an annual review of all courses and recommending modifications or changes required
to meet new skills requirements. All changes or modifications in the Department’s
firearms qualifications courses will be submitted in writing and approved by the Deputy
Chief.
B. All officers will qualify at least annually with the Department issued pistol.
Department issued ammunition will be used for each qualification.
C. Officers who want to carry a backup or off-duty weapon will qualify at least once
each year with any approved backup or off-duty weapons carried, limited to two off-duty
weapons.
D. All officers will qualify at least once each year on the Department’s patrol rifle.
E. The minimum passing score with any Department authorized firearm is 70% on the
courses outlined.
F. Qualification results will be recorded on a pass/fail basis.
G. The firearms instructor/range officer will forward a copy of attendance and
qualification results to the Deputy Chief for recording in the officer’s training records.
H. All weapons will be inspected by a Department Armorer on an annual basis.
IV. QUALIFICATIONS:
A. Qualification:
1. Qualifications with the following:
a. Authorized on-duty handgun,
b. Off-duty handgun, and
c. Patrol rifle.
2. Stress course:
a. Authorized on-duty handgun and
b. Patrol Rifle.
V. FAILURE TO QUALIFY PROCEDURE:

-- 2 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 3 of 7
A. If an officer fails to attain a passing score on the qualification course with his/her duty
weapon, he/she will be afforded a second opportunity to attain a passing score.
B. If an officer fails to qualify, he/she is responsible for notifying the Deputy Chief of
such. The Deputy Chief shall:
1. Arrange for the officer to receive the appropriate training to correct the problem
causing the deficiency.
2. Coordinate the re-scheduling of the officer for firearms qualification within
thirty (30) days from the first scheduled date.
3. If an officer does not receive a passing score within thirty (30) days, the officer
may not be authorized to carry his on-duty or off-duty weapon or serve as a
commissioned officer of this Department as determined by the Chief of Police.
VI. CARE OF WEAPONS USED FOR QUALIFICATION:
A. All weapons used for qualification will be cleaned before the officer reports for
his/her next duty shift.
B. The patrol rifles used will be cleaned before they are placed back in the Department
Armory or assigned police vehicle.
C. All side arms that are carried while on duty are subject to random inspection for
cleanliness and proper ammunition by a supervisor or a Department Armorer.
VII. LOSS OR THEFT OF FIREARM:
The officer shall immediately notify the on-duty Shift commander following the loss or
theft of a Department or personally owned firearm. A police report containing all facts
and circumstances shall be prepared. A copy of the police report shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police through the chain of command.
VIII. CLEANING AND REPAIR:
A. Each officer is responsible for keeping the service handgun and any other weapon
carried clean at all times. Any damage should be reported to the officer’s immediate
supervisor.
B. Other than field stripping, Department owned weapons will not be taken apart or
disassembled. These weapons will be disassembled, repaired and adjusted only by a
Department armorer.
IX. FIREARMS RANGE:

-- 3 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 4 of 7
A. Officers will use a Department approved range for training and qualification. If an
outdoor range is used, it will be designated and coordinated by a St. Louis County Police
Department or Olivette Police Department range officer.
B. Alcoholic beverages are not permitted on the range. Anyone under the influence of
an alcoholic beverage is not permitted on the range or to possess a firearm.
C. Any infractions or unsafe actions, by officers using the range, will immediately be
reported to the Deputy Chief.
X. PATROL RIFLES
A. Patrol rifles that are assigned to a specific vehicle may be left in the lockable rack,
when the vehicle is parked and locked on the police station parking lot. If the vehicle is
left at any other location, such as for repairs, the weapons will be removed.
B. When secured in the Department Armory, patrol rifles will be stored unloaded, with
the action open. Ammunition will be put in the storage compartment provided for that
purpose.
XI. WEAPON MODES:
A. Patrol rifles modes:
1. SAFE - Action open, magazine removed, safety “ON”.
2. TRANSPORT - Action closed on empty chamber, magazine inserted, safety
“ON”.
3. TACTICAL - Action closed with round in chamber, magazine inserted, safety
“ON”.
4. FIRING - Action closed with round in chamber, magazine inserted, safety
“OFF”.
B. Transportation of weapon:
1. Police Vehicle - “TRANSPORT” mode - In a padded case in a locked trunk of
the vehicle or in an approved lockable rack within the passenger compartment or
trunk of the police vehicle.
2. Personal Vehicle - “SAFE” Mode - When transporting the patrol rifle to the
range or other training facility, the weapon will be in a carrying case, without a
magazine inserted, and secured in the vehicle trunk out of public view.

-- 4 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 5 of 7
D. Loading of Magazines:
1. Each patrol rifle is equipped with five (5) magazines as follows:
a. one (1) 30-round magazine in the rifle
b. two (2) 20-round magazines in the rifle armor carrier
c. two (2) 30-round magazines in the rifle armor carrier
2. Each magazine will be loaded to capacity with Department-issued ammunition.
3. At the beginning of an officer’s tour of duty, each patrol rifle will be loaded
with a 30-round magazine.
4. The four (4) extra magazines shall be accessible to officers in each police rifle
armor carrier while on duty.
E. Weapons Maintenance:
1. All officers will be responsible for maintaining the Department-issued patrol
rifle assigned to their Department vehicle. The weapons should also be cleaned
and lubricated after being fired in training and as soon as possible after
operational use.
2. At the beginning of each shift, officers will be required to conduct a check of
the Department-issued patrol rifle assigned to their Department vehicle to ensure
that it is in a proper and safe manner. Any perceived weapon deficiencies should
be reported to a Department Armorer immediately.
3. A Department Armorer will be required to inspect each patrol rifle on an
annual basis and report the results of the inspection to the Deputy Chief in a
written report.
XII. FIREARMS SAFETY:
A. It is incumbent upon each member of the Olivette Police Department to strictly
adhere to the general and common-sense rules of firearms safety. Members of the
Department who are found to have been negligent in the handling of firearms, on or off
duty, will be subject to disciplinary action.
B. Safety and safe firearms handling are everyone’s responsibility. Keep firearms and
ammunition stored separately, securely and out of the reach of children. The use of
gunlocks will help prevent firearms from being used (discharged) by unauthorized
persons. Strict safety practices should always be followed even when your weapon is
locked.

-- 5 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 6 of 7
C. Except for general maintenance, storage or authorized training, officers shall not draw
or exhibit their firearm unless circumstances create strong reasonable cause to believe
that it may be necessary to lawfully use the weapon in accordance with this order.
D. A firearm shall not be used as a club, hammer, pry bar, tool, or for any other purpose
other than for which it was intended.
E. A revolver shall not be carried or placed at any time in a "cocked" condition.
F. Officers shall not engage in any "horse play", "quick-draw", or any other similar
activity.
G. Weapons shall not be used for any purpose other than approved range training,
performance of duty, or as otherwise provided by law.
H. No officer shall display or provide any weapon to a citizen to inspect, examine or
otherwise handle.
I. No officer shall furnish his firearm to any citizen or civilian enlisting his assistance.
XIII. TRAINING
The Department will provide in-service firearms training to officers annually. The in-
service training will be conducted by certified instructors. The firearms instructor will
forward a copy of training attendance to the Deputy Chief for recording in the officer’s
training records.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 12/5/2009
Revised: 9/13/2010
Revised: 10/11/2012
Revised: 10/15/2014
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 8/1/2016
Revised: 3/21/2018
Revised: 5/15/2018
Revised: 7/8/2020
Revised: 6/15/2021
Revised: 11/22/2021

-- 6 of 7 --

OPD - 9.3
Page 7 of 7
Revised: 11/7/2023
Revised: 6/4/2025
Expiration: Indefinite

-- 7 of 7 --

