OPD - 9.4
Page 1 of 4
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER:
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Physical Response to Resistance or Aggression
Discharge of Weapons
Response to Resistance or Aggression Review
PHYSICAL RESPONSE/WEAPONS DISCHARGE/ RESPONSE TO
RESISTANCE OR AGGRESSION REVIEW
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish guidelines for reporting the discharge of
weapons or response to resistance or aggression by officers of this Department.
II. POLICY
When a required response to resistance or aggression by an officer results in an injury or
claimed injury to the officer or another person, or when any officer utilizes a less than
lethal weapon or lethal weapon, the officer will report the details surrounding the use in
writing to their immediate supervisor before the end of the officer's tour of duty.
III. PROCEDURES:
A. Officers of this Department will complete Form #OPD – F1207 DISCHARGE OF
WEAPON (non-human target) or Form #OPD – F1057 RESPONSE TO RESISTANCE
OR AGRESSION NOTIFICATION (human target) in addition to any required arrest and
incident reports when he/she:
1. Discharges any weapon outside of training or lawful recreational purposes;
2. Performs any action that results, or allegedly results in the physical injury or
death of another person;
3. Responds to resistance or aggression using lethal or less lethal weapons; or
4. Responds to resistance or aggression by using a weaponless physical response
at a level as defined by the agency as well as the pointing of firearms or Taser
X26P.

-- 1 of 4 --

OPD - 9.4
Page 2 of 4
a. Physical Response to Resistance or Aggression
I. Officers will immediately notify their immediate Supervisor
when any type of physical response to resistance or aggression is
used (i.e. pushing, pulling, throwing).
II. Depending upon the seriousness of the injury, the Deputy Chief
must be notified immediately by the Shift Supervisor. In the event
of serious injury or death, the Chief of Police will contact the St.
Louis County Prosecuting Attorney and request a determination on
whether independent investigation is warranted. In case of death,
the medical examiner will also be notified.
b. Discharge of Weapons
I. On-duty officers will immediately notify their immediate
supervisor whenever they discharge a weapon. Off-duty officers
who discharge a weapon under color of law or accidentally will
immediately notify the on-duty shift supervisor of the incident. The
on-duty supervisor will submit the details of the incident through
the chain of command. The officer will also complete and submit
to the watch commander either Form #OPD – 1207 DISCHARGE
OF WEAPON or Form #OPD – F1057 RESPONSE TO
RESISTANCE OR AGRESSION NOTIFICATION. Exception to
this will be when officers are firing under training, competition or
recreational purposes. A finding of negligence by the Chief of
Police may result in a requirement that the officer undergo a
weapons certification training program or other disciplinary action.
II. The on-duty supervisor will respond immediately to the scene
of all weapon discharges within the City of Olivette and will
conduct/supervise the preliminary investigation of the incident. If
the incident occurs within a municipal area, unincorporated St.
Louis County, or the City of St. Louis and the employee is on-
duty, dispatch will make notification to the on-duty supervisor who
will respond to the scene if available or his designee and cooperate
with the local authorities in the investigation. If the incident has
resulted in any personal injury, the on-duty supervisor will secure
and retain all the weapons and ammunition on the officer's person.
The weapons and ammunition will be returned to the officer as
deemed appropriate by the Chief of Police.
III. In cases involving the death of an individual by an officer, the
officer's immediate supervisor, after being notified, will
immediately contact the Chief of Police. An immediate internal

-- 2 of 4 --

OPD - 9.4
Page 3 of 4
investigation will be initiated. In case of death, the Attorney
General's office and medical examiner will also be notified.
IV. Pending administrative review, any officer who must take the
life of another person, or who's response to resistance or
aggression causes serious physical injury to another person, will be
removed from the line-duty assignment. This is to protect both the
officer's and the community's interests until the situations resolved.
V. A mandatory psychological follow-up of post-shooting trauma
will be directed by the Chief of Police to evaluate medical fitness
for duty.
B. Review
1. All Responses to Resistance or Aggression Notification forms will be reviewed
by the Deputy Chief and the Chief of Police. Conclusions will be drawn as to the
appropriateness of the response.
2. The Deputy Chief and Chief of Police will conduct an annual analysis of all
Response to Resistance or Aggression Notification forms. At a minimum, the
analysis should identify:
a. date and time of incidents;
b. types of encounters resulting in responses to resistance or aggression;
c. trends or patterns related to race, age and gender of subjects involved;
d. trends or patterns resulting in injury to any person including employees;
and
e. impact of findings on policies, practices, equipment, and training
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 2/5/2009
Revised: 6/20/2016
Revised: 5/10/2018
Revised: 5/29/2020
Revised: 11/22/2021

-- 3 of 4 --

OPD - 9.4
Page 4 of 4
Revised: 11/7/2023
Revised: 1/30/2024
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 4 of 4 --

