OPD - 9.6
Page 1 of 6
DEPARTMENTAL GENERAL ORDER
OLIVETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE
Index as:
Conducted Electrical Weapon
Taser X26P
________________________________________________________________________
TASER X26P
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this general order is to provide police officers with guidelines on the use
of the Taser in conjunction with Departmental policy 9.1. The Taser X26P is a defensive
weapon that is listed in the Response to Resistance or Aggression Continuum at the same
level as hard empty hand control (stun blows, motor dysfunction).
II. POLICY
A. The Department recognizes the need for additional law enforcement tools in order to
gain control of subjects to protect the public welfare. The Taser System is an optional
tool that can be used to gain control of subject(s) when a deadly response to resistance or
aggression does not appear to be justified and/or necessary. The use of the Taser System
is not a replacement for firearms, other tools of subject control, and self-defense
techniques.
III. DEFINITIONS
A. Police Officer – A commissioned employee of the Olivette Police Department.
B. Taser X26P – A less than lethal Conducted Electrical Weapon that uses propelled
probes and insulated wires or direct contact to conduct energy to affect the sensory and
motor functions of the nervous system.
C. Data Port – The Taser X26P has a Data port located inside the Performance Power
Magazine housing unit. The Data Port will be used to record the usage of the Taser X26P
to ensure accurate incident documentation.
D. Air Cartridge – The Air Cartridge is the delivery system for the Taser X26P. The
compressed nitrogen cartridge inside the Air Cartridge projects the two Probes and
insulated wires to the target. Each Air Cartridge is identified by serial number.

-- 1 of 6 --

OPD - 9.6
Page 2 of 6
E. Probes – ½ inch #8 sterile barbs, which are connected by insulated wires to the Air
Cartridge.
IV. PROCEDURES
A. Equipment and Training
1. The Taser X26P and two air cartridges will be utilized by police officers who
have successfully completed the Taser User Certification Training Program and
have been approved by the Taser Instructors. The Taser X26P will be assigned to
each officer at the beginning of his/her shift; air cartridges will be permanently
issued to each officer. The Taser X26P is the only Conducted Electrical Weapon
authorized for use by employees of this Department.
2. Police officers will receive user re-certification training on the use of the Taser
X26P on an annual basis.
3. Authorized police officers in uniform assigned to enforcement duties will carry
the Taser X26P on their support side (opposite side of body from firearm) in a
Department-approved holster for the Taser X26P.
4. Authorized police officers in uniform will carry the spare air cartridge in an air
cartridge pouch on the duty belt. Replacement of an air cartridge due to negligent
damage by the officer will be at the officer’s expense.
5. Authorized police officers not in uniform have the option of carrying the Taser
X26P, in a Department-approved holster, and spare air cartridge.
6. Police officers may be restricted from using the Taser X26P by the Chief of
Police.
B. Maintenance
1. Any Taser X26P, Air Cartridge, or holster that is not in proper working order
will immediately be put out of service by the officer discovering the damage. The
officer will notify a certified Taser Instructor of the specific reason the item was
placed out of service. The item will not be placed back in service unless approved
by a certified Taser Instructor.
2. The Taser X26P will be inspected and downloaded twice a year. These
downloads will be in addition to any download that is in conjunction with a Taser
deployment.
3. Police officers will conduct a spark test prior to the start of their tour of duty.
The spark test is designed to ensure that the Taser X26P is working, the battery is
performing, the Taser X26P is adequately charged and to energize the
components in the high voltage section of the Taser X26P.

-- 2 of 6 --

OPD - 9.6
Page 3 of 6
Spark Test:
1. Point Taser X26P into the blue container marked “Taser Spark Test
Only” located in the Squad Room.
2. REMOVE AIR CARTRIDGE!
3. Keep Air Cartridge away from Taser X26P.
4. Turn Safety “off” on Taser X26P.
5. AGAIN MAKE SURE AIR CARTRIDGE IS REMOVED AND
TASER X26P IS POINTED INTO THE BLUE CONTAINER
MARKED “TASER SPARK TEST ONLY” LOCATED IN THE
SQUAD ROOM.
6. Pull trigger on Taser X26P.
7. Look for spark.
8. Listen for erratic spark.
9. Allow spark test to run for a full 5-second cycle.
10. Turn Safety “on”.
11. Replace air cartridge and holster Taser X26P.
C. Deployment
1. The Taser X26P will be used in accordance with policy OPD – 9.1. The
decision to use the Taser X26P will be based upon the same criteria an officer
uses when deciding to use hard empty hand control techniques. The decision
must be made dependant on the actions of the subject(s) or threat facing the
officer(s), and the totality of the circumstances surrounding the incident. In any
event, the use of the Taser X26P must be reasonable and necessary.
2. Prior to deployment of the Taser X26P, the officer should announce “TASER”
when practical to alert other officers of the intention to deploy the Taser X26P.
3. Officers will use the least number of cycles necessary to gain/maintain control
of the subject.
4. After deploying the Taser X26P, the officer will announce “HANDCUFF” to
alert other officers prior to those officers approaching the subject to affect control
of said subject.
5. When practical, officers will have lethal cover or another reasonable and
appropriate subject control option available as backup when deploying the Taser
X26P.
6. The Taser X26P may be used in those situations where:
a. A subject(s) is threatening himself, an officer(s), or another person(s)
with physical force and other means of controlling the subject(s) are

-- 3 of 6 --

OPD - 9.6
Page 4 of 6
unreasonable or could cause injury to the subject(s), the officer(s), or other
person(s).
b. In cases where officer/subject factors indicate the officer(s), offender(s)
or others would be endangered by the use of a physical response to
resistance or aggression.
c. Other means of lesser or equal response to resistance or aggression have
been ineffective or impractical, and the threat still exists to the officer(s),
subject(s) or others.
7. When deploying the Taser X26P, the lower center of body mass should be the
primary target area for frontal discharges. When possible, avoid chest shots. For
discharges at the back of a suspect, the center of body mass should be the primary
target area. The head and face should not be targeted unless the appropriate level
of response to resistance or aggression can be justified.
8. Drive stuns are an acceptable use of the Taser X26P. This option should be
considered:
a. When one probe misses its target;
b. As a follow-up to a 2-probe deployment; and
c. With the Air Cartridge removed as a pain compliance technique
9. When an officer fires the Taser X26P, his/her supervisor will log the weapon
on a Taser Usage Log Sheet, Departmental Form #OPD – F1049. The Taser
Usage Log Sheet is in OmniForm and can be utilized to keep a running total of
deployments. A new log sheet is not required for each deployment. A test arc of
the weapon will be noted at this time and any additional deployments of the
weapon throughout that officer’s tour of duty shall be recorded on the log, along
with the reason for deployment and appropriate report numbers, if applicable.
These logs will be maintained and periodically audited by a certified Taser
Instructor(s).
D. Limitations and Restrictions
1. The Taser X26P will never be used punitively or for the purposes of coercion.
It is to be used as a way of averting a potentially injurious or dangerous situation.
2. The Taser X26P has an effective range of 3 to 19 feet with a 25-foot cartridge.
Ranges fewer than 3 feet may not provide adequate distribution of the probes to
allow the unit to function properly.

-- 4 of 6 --

OPD - 9.6
Page 5 of 6
3. The Taser X26P has the ability to ignite flammable liquids and gases. It will
not be deployed at subjects who have come into contact with flammables or in
environments where flammables are obviously present.
4. Proper consideration and care should be taken when deploying the Taser X26P
on subjects who are in an elevated position or in other circumstances where a fall
may cause substantial injury or death. Officers must be prepared to justify such a
deployment. The same considerations should be made if the subject is in water
deep enough for possible submersion. The Taser X26P will function safely on a
subject in water.
E. Post Deployment Procedures
1. Probes will be removed by any officer trained in the use of the Taser System.
Officers shall always wear medical gloves when removing the probes from any
subject. Wounds will be treated with an alcohol-wipe and band aid at the skin
puncture point by an officer.
2. If the subject has been struck in the face, neck, buttocks, groin, female breast or
the barb separates from the probe, he/she will be transported to a medical facility
to have the probes removed. Fit for Confinement procedures will apply in these
circumstances. This same procedure will apply if the subject(s) has been drive
stunned in the above sensitive areas.
3. Photographs will be taken of all points of contact between the subject(s) and
the Taser X26P unless the subject(s) refuses to be photographed. Such refusal
will be documented in the report. If a subject is transported to a medical facility
for probe removal/drive stun, photographs of the subject will not be taken by
officers of this Command.
4. The Probes and the spent Air Cartridge will be logged into evidence with
proper bio-hazard warnings. When practical, do not break the wires from the
probes before submitting to evidence.
5. The supervisor of the officer involved will fill out the Taser Usage Log Sheet,
Departmental Form #OPD – F1049. A Departmental Response to Resistance or
Aggression Notification, Departmental Form #OPD - F1057 will also be
completed. The supervisor will make copies of both forms and distribute them as
follows:
a. Taser Usage Log Sheet
1. One copy with the original report
2. One copy to a Taser Instructor’s mailbox

-- 5 of 6 --

OPD - 9.6
Page 6 of 6
3. One copy forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief
of Police
b. Response to Resistance or Aggression Notification
1. One copy with the original report
2. One copy forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief
of Police
The forms will be forwarded through the chain of command to the Chief of Police
by the end of the deploying officer’s shift. The Taser Instructor will download
the Taser X26P and forward the download information through the chain of
command to the Chief of Police as soon as practical. Watch commanders will
ensure that all documentation and photographs, if applicable, are in accordance
with this General Order.
6. Subjects controlled by the use of the Taser X26P will not be transported face
down.
7. The offender will be booked for Resisting Arrest or Failure to Comply in
addition to any other applicable charges.
This General Order supersedes all prior directives and orders inconsistent therewith.
BY ORDER OF:
Signature on File
Beth M. Andreski
Chief of Police
Effective Date: 2/18/2010
Revised: 4/22/2015
Revised: 7/13/2016
Revised: 3/13/2018
Revised: 1/14/2020
Revised: 11/24/2021
Revised: 12/18/2023
Expiration Date: Indefinite

-- 6 of 6 --

